SAZKA Group submission to the EC public consultation on Artificial 
Intelligence – ethical and legal requirements (“EC proposal on the Artificial 
Intelligence Act”​https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-artificial-intelligence-artificialintelligence ) ​ ) 
1. Short intro  
SAZKA Group (SG) is one of Europe’s fastest growing lottery companies, primarily 
focused on national lottery games, instant lotteries and online lotteries with a 
secondary focus on digital gambling and sports betting; SG has leading market 
positions in the Czech Republic, Greece, Cyprus, Austria and Italy. As one of the 
European lottery leaders, SG is acknowledged in the world lottery market for its 
iconic and trusted brands and unrivalled distribution networks. Through our 63,000 
points of sale and digital platforms, SG serves an addressable market of over 79 
million adults, bringing in annual sales of over €17bn. (https://www.sazkagroup.com/) 
2. General Comments 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) represents both opportunities and risks for societies, 
citizens and businesses. SG encourages the EU to pave the way for legal certainty 
on the application of human centric AI and to support growing trust in new 
technologies, whilst protecting citizens’ fundamental rights. An unregulated 
development and deployment of AI technologies is likely to lead to both unethical 
behaviors and market disruptions.  
SG notes that the generic concept of “AI” stands for many diverse technologies and 
applications, and therefore underlines that may be difficult to design a “one size fits 
all” policy. Furthermore, some areas of AI deployment may fall under existing 
legislation; therefore, the proposed regulatory approach should ensure a coherent 
legislative environment, taking into consideration the existing policies and legislation 
(GDPR, Data protection, Data use and storage, Data transfers, Product Safety 
Directive, Fin tech legislation, NIS, e-commerce, Product liability directive, just to 
name some).  
3. With regard to the recent EC proposal on the AI act https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonisedrules-artificial-intelligence-artificial-intelligence ), SG agrees that AI legislation 
shall follow a “risk based approach” and that the development and application 

of AI based technologies shall first of exclude unacceptable risks to the safety 
and the fundamental rights of human beings. 
4. Therefore, SG concurs that the classification of activities as per “prohibited”, 
“high”, “reduced” and “minimal” risk is a step in the right direction, noting 
however that the risk classification of a given activity shall be subject to an ex 
ante assessment and discussion between regulators and interested 
stakeholders; in particular, operators (IA developers and users) shall be 
granted the right to participate in the discussion and to object to the final 
assessment via a specific redress procedure. 
5. AI based applications in the gambling sector 
3.1 
Players’ identification: Customers identification is essential to ensure 
compliance with responsible gambling legal requirements and corporate internal 
policies: 
strict minimum age requirements shall be respected to stop under age to 
access our products 
monitor and prevent excessive gambling habits, via the self-exclusion 
programs either at national or at companies’ levels. 
Regarding AML requirements, operators perform Duty of Care (DOC) tasks 
both to ensure the identification of customers and to track the origin of the funds that 
are staked: also in this case remote identification systems can help to address Know 
Your Customer (KYC) requirements, as well as to trace payout payments. This is 
also true for authorities in their surveillance and control activities. 
3.2 
Players’ personalisation: SG fully complies with the protection of personal 
data privacy requirements as set up by the GDPR. Any permitted elaboration of data 
- based on AI/machine learning algorithms - enables to tailor made offers to players 
which match with their preferences or habits. It is however even more relevant for 
SG that the digital footprint players leave behind enable us to monitor and avoid 
excessive – pathological gambling and de facto, to enforce our “responsible 
gambling policy”. 
3.3 
Enhance players’ experience: in SG we embrace newt technologies to 
provide for “more fun” products. The priority is not to increase the stakes per 
individual player but to make the experience more enjoyable. Some AI applications 
are changing the offer in the gambling business, namely be use of “augmented 
reality” (in online casinos or online (e-sports) betting,) or “recommendation engines” 
(Avatars). In some cases, “augmented reality” is combined with “virtual reality”, 
creating “mixed reality”. 

3.4 
Integrity in sports betting: metrics can be used to detect irregularities, 
frauds and match fixing and enhance integrity in the segment of sport betting. These 
applications are already used in some large tournaments, with AI elaborating large 
amount of data, in a very short time, enabling operators, sport integrity organisations 
and authorities to track irregularities in a very short time. 
4. Specific aspects of the proposal and their potential impact on the 
gambling sector. 
4.1 Remote biometric identification. 
SG believes that the deployment of remote biometric identification systems can be 
helpful to achieve some regulatory objectives in the gambling sector. At the same 
time however, biometric data clearly classify as “personal data” and their use shall 
be protected. We therefore fully support a restricted approach re the use of biometric 
identification technologies but would still argue that this application may be helpful to 
fulfill some key legal requirements relating to gambling, both in terms of protection of 
players and fight against crime. 
We therefore recommend that regulators shall consider in the future some 
exceptionally authorized (restricted, certified and monitored in controlled 
environment) applications for remote biometric identifications adapted to: 
• Control on respect of the minimum age legal requirements for accessing 
proposed games; 
• Control for players’ self-exclusion (as per the national self- exclusion register 
or the companies’ self-exclusion lists) and other “responsible gambling” 
related measures; 
• Control and tracing of payments or payout, to fight money laundering and 
terrorist financing. 
4.2 Risk classification. 
The risk classification of the deployment of AI in the gambling industry should be 
carefully assessed. SG notes that the EC has declared that the gaming industry is 
deemed to be classified as “minimum risk”. 
Gambling should be classified under the category of “minimum risk” and the use of 
AI applications to the games should be free, nevertheless, SG welcomes discussions 
with regulators and peers to assess the risk level of existing applications and 
regulatory boundaries for future developments. SG believes that innovation is key for 
the future of our industry and is open to some regulatory guidance. 

4.3 Transparency obligations. 
We fully agree that transparency obligation shall apply for systems that are used to 
interact with humans, such as any activity that is linked to augmented reality. 
Consumers must be always in the position to withdraw consent to the use of the AI 
application and to make informed choices or step back from a given situation, with 
the exception however of those applications to secure compliance with legal 
requirements (for instance due diligence and KYC). 
Another aspect of transparency is “transparency of algorithms”. We believe that 
transparency should pertain a declaration of use of AI technology, but that algorithms 
are the property of companies or software providers, they should be covered by 
trade secret and that IPRs shall be protected. 
4.4 Definition of public spaces. 
Some gambling products are offered in gambling and betting halls. We believe that 
these spaces fall under the general definition of public spaces. About the question 
whether online market places (i.e. gambling websites) can be defined as “public 
spaces”, we agree that Member States shall remain free to set their own rules on 
justified authorized use. Furthermore, we would advocate to use the general 
principle of what is prohibited land based shall be prohibited remotely, and that what 
is permitted land-based shall be also permitted remotely”. 
4.5 Sandbox.  
We support the use of “sandboxes” to testing AI in a secure environment, without 
affecting the general system or platform and their data. 
Please do not hesitate to contact us any further information. 
Thank you for your attention. Best regards 
Kamil Ziegler 
Head of Institutional Affairs 
SAZKA Group  