Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology 
Artificial Intelligence and Digital Industry (Directorate A) 
European Commission 
1049 Bruxelles/Brussels 
Belgium 
30 June 2021 
MPP input to the European Commission public consultation on the proposed Regulation laying 
down harmonized rules on artificial intelligence (AI Act) 
To whom it may concern, 
The not-for-profit Medtech & Pharma Platform Association (MPP) welcomes the European 
Commission proposal for a Regulation laying down rules on AI. MPP supports efforts to optimize the 
regulatory framework to create the right conditions for healthcare innovation. MPP welcomes the 
possibility to comment on the proposed Regulation and would like to seize this opportunity to share 
some reflections and suggestions. 
We are the opinion that risk categories for AI provide a useful base for the regulation of AI. In this 
area, we would welcome clarifications on the determination of the high-risk category in the 
proposed Regulation and how such category correlates to existing legal frameworks, especially with 
the Medical Devices and In Vitro Diagnostics Regulations (MDR and IVDR). Notably, there is a 
concern that the existence of different risk assessments under the AI and medical device legislations 
might create confusion. Under a risk-based regulatory system and in consideration of the scope of 
use, some AI-driven software may be categorized as low or intermediate risk under the MDR and 
IVDR, whereas the proposed Regulation may classify such products as high-risk. In this regard, it 
could be beneficial to consider aligning the risk levels described in the proposed Regulation with risk 
levels outlined in the MDR and IVDR for consistency. The recently entered into force MDR and 
upcoming IVDR provide an adequate framework for the regulation of Medical Device Software 
(MDSW) and it is important to make sure that the proposed Regulation is fully compatible with 
them. 
In addition, MPP would like to share the following comments and questions: 
Recital 60: Does this imply that a pre-trained model cannot be used in an AI high-risk system 
as a software of unknown (or uncertain) pedigree (or provenance) (SOUP) or off-the-shelf 
(OTS), for which the collaboration of the supplier is not necessarily needed? 
Article 43 section 4: How does the process for pre-determined changes for MDSW work? Are 
the rules mentioned in this article supposed to come from the regulators or does the 
paragraph mean that the manufacturer can specify in the instructions the modification (e.g. 
in accuracy) that can occur without implying a "substantial modification"? 
Annex II: Companies may develop internal products in the areas of high-risk AI systems. How 
does the EU intend to monitor the internal usage of AI systems that do not reach the 
market? 
Annex IV: Is the pre-specification in this Annex comparable to (SPS) Software as Medical 
Device (SaMD) pre-Specifications, Algorithm Change Protocol (ACP) from the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) AI Discussion Paper on the regulatory framework for modification 

to AI /machine learning (AI/ML) based SaMD? Is there any possibility to harmonize those 
two approaches with the current proposed Regulation? 
Annex IV, 2(e): More clarification is needed on how human oversight is defined and 
applicable, examples from medical device software would be appreciated. 
The proposal states that it will consider harmonized technical requirements. Will standards 
such as IEC 62304, ISO13485, ISO14971 be integrated? 
How does the Commission plan to build the regulatory sandboxes to facilitate products 
following regulations MDR and IVDR? More specifically, can certain activities, like data 
collection with the purpose of building a model or tests for clinical evaluation, be performed 
in the context of these sandboxes? And what would be the regulatory steps to move from a 
sandbox to the market for such a product? 
How is the expansion of the AI system (e.g. scaling up to different devices, from Android to 
iDevice) organized in terms of submission? 
The proposed penalties in case of infringement may impact the commitment of manufacturers in 
ensuring deep and intensive monitoring of their own AI systems in the post-market surveillance 
phase. To promote a shared culture of rigorous monitoring, incentives to the manufacturers that 
find incidents in their own AI system could be put in place. Such incentives could, for instance, 
materialize via decreased fines when infringements are found and addressed by manufacturers 
themselves. 
MPP continuously seeks dialogue with relevant stakeholders to create an appropriate framework for 
combined products (covering combined use of medicinal products, medical devices, MDSW, AI, and 
IVDs) that fosters innovation, reduces time to market, and addresses patients’ needs. We thank you 
for considering our position and the proposals outlined above. 
MPP remains at the European Commission’s disposal for further dialogue and collaboration. 
Yours sincerely, 
Shayesteh Fürst-Ladani 
MPP President 
association@medtech-pharma.com 
About the Medtech & Pharma Platform Association 
The not-for-profit Medtech & Pharma Platform Association (MPP) draws together companies from the 
pharmaceutical, medtech and ICT sectors and provides opportunities to exchange knowledge and to 
collaborate in technology and regulatory areas related to combined products. 
MPP’s objectives are: 
To enhance synergies between the pharma, medtech and ICT industries, 
To establish new collaboration models to ensure and accelerate market access for safe and 
innovative treatment options, 
To contribute to the development of a balanced and proportionate regulatory and policy 
framework for combined products including connected combined products. 