Education International 
Internationale de l'Education 
Internacional de la Educación 
http://www.ei-ie.org 
EUROPEAN REGION- 
ETUCE 
President 
Larry FLANAGAN 
Vice-Presidents 
Odile CORDELIER 
Andreas KELLER 
Trudy KERPERIEN 
Dorte LANGE 
Galina MERKULOVA 
Branimir STRUKELJ 
Boulevard Bischoffsheim, 15 
1000 Brussels, Belgium 
Tel +32 2 224 06 91/92 
Fax +32 2 224 06 94 
secretariat@csee-etuce.org 
http://www.csee-etuce.org 
European Director 
Susan FLOCKEN 
Treasurer 
Joan DONEGAN 
ETUCE 
European Trade Union Committee for Education 
EI European Region 
ETUCE position on the EU Regulation on Artificial Intelligence 
(Adopted by the ETUCE Bureau on 7 June 2021) 
Background: 
On 21 April 2021, the European Commission published a proposal for a “Regulation on a 
European Approach for Artificial intelligence” (the AI Regulation). With this proposal, the 
European Commission follows up on its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence (February 
2020), based on the results of a broad consultation process to which ETUCE contributed. 
The aim of the initiative is to establish the first EU legal framework regulating the entire 
lifecycle of the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in all sectors, including education. 
The AI Regulation classifies the use of Artificial Intelligence in various sectors based on the 
risk that the AI tools have on the health and safety and the fundamental rights of 
individuals. Concerning education, the proposal considers the use of Artificial Intelligence 
tools in education as high-risk as potentially harmful to the right to education and training 
as well as the right not to be discriminated in education. For high-risk sectors, the AI 
Regulation establishes stricter horizontal legal requirements to which AI tools must comply 
before being authorised on the market. These include risk management system during the 
entire lifecycle of the AI system. 
Following the publication of the proposal, on 26 April 2021, the European Commission 
issued a public consultation that will run until 20 July 2021, accompanied by an impact 
assessment report. 
The following text is the ETUCE response to the public consultation bringing the perspective 
of teachers, academics and other education personnel on the sections of the AI Regulation 
that touch upon the education sector. 
ETUCE reply: 
ETUCE welcomes the publication of the AI Regulation as it sets the ground for the first 
comprehensive EU regulation on Artificial Intelligence to ensure a controlled development 
of AI tools in education and address the risks connected to their use by teachers, academic, 
other education personnel and students. While ETUCE recognises the potential of digital 
technologies and Artificial Intelligence tools to bring about improvements in education, it 
also underlines the numerous ethical concerns related to their trustworthiness, data 
privacy, accountability, transparency and their impact on equality and inclusion in 
education. ETUCE underlines that further research at national and European level is needed 
to assess and address the risks connected to the use of Artificial Intelligence in education 
with constant and meaningful consultation with education social partners. 

AI in education as a high-risk: 
ETUCE welcomes that the AI Regulation classifies the use of AI tools in education and 
vocational training as high-risk underlining that “When improperly designed and used, such 
systems may violate the right to education and training as well as the right not to be 
discriminated against and perpetuate historical patterns of discrimination”. ETUCE 
emphasises that the EU Commission initiative should ensure that the development of 
Artificial Intelligence in education does not infringe the human right of all individuals to 
have equal access to quality education. This is enshrined in the first and third principles of 
the European Pillar of Social Rights and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights. 
ETUCE supports the European Commission’s proposal to set stricter horizontal legal 
requirements for the AI tools used in the education sector. The AI Regulation proposal also 
foresees the establishment of a risk management system to analyse the risks associated 
with the use of the AI tools in education and monitor them during the entire lifecycle of the 
AI tools. In this regard, ETUCE believes that the European Commission should support the 
development of clear and binding measures, including ethical guidelines, to address the 
risks that AI tools pose concerning transparency, accountability, intellectual property rights, 
data privacy, cyber-safety, equality and environmental protection. 
Governance: 
The Proposal for Regulation seeks to establish a governance system leading to the 
establishment of a European Artificial Intelligence Board with the involvement of national 
authorities to monitor the implementation of the regulation. Nevertheless, ETUCE 
underlines that the effective implementation of the AI legislation in education requires the 
meaningful involvement of teachers, academics and education staff as co-creators of 
Artificial Intelligence tools in education. Education trade unions have a crucial role to play 
to addressing the risks of Artificial Intelligence in education and bring the perspective of AI 
users on the implementation of the regulation. It is therefore crucial that education social 
partners are actively involved in the activities of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 
through regular consultations and meaningful social dialogue, both at national and 
European level to monitor the implementation of the regulation and address the risks 
related to the use of Artificial Intelligence in education. 
The role of teachers in education: 
Teachers, academics and other education personnel play a crucial role in fostering the full 
human potential of students and their role in education must be preserved. ETUCE calls on 
the European Commission and the Member States to interdict the Artificial Intelligence 
tools that are designed to replace education personnel or can damage the social value 
and the quality of education. Besides, the AI Regulation should ensure that the 
development of AI in education does not reduce the role of teachers to mere providers of 
instructions but rather serves as a supporting tool for the teaching profession while 

preserving the professional and pedagogical autonomy and academic freedom of teachers 
and academics. 
Transparency and AI literacy and CPD of teachers on AI: 
ETUCE welcomes that the proposal of AI Regulation requires that users of AI tools (who 
include students, teachers, academic and education staff for the education sector) must be 
adequately informed about the intended purpose, level of accuracy, residual risks of AI 
tools. Nevertheless, ETUCE highlights that providing information is not sufficient to ensure 
the transparency of the AI tools when users miss the adequate digital skills and data and AI 
literacy to interpret it. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to improve the importance of 
digital skills, AI literacy and data literacy in educational curricula and raise awareness on 
the risks related to the use of AI tools in education. It is also essential to ensure that 
infrastructures of education institutions are adequately equipped for digital education as 
well as to provide equal access to digital technologies and ICT tools to all teachers and 
students, with particular attention to the most disadvantaged groups. To these purposes, 
sustainable public investment should be provided by national governments and the 
European Commission should provide financial support through European funding such as 
Horizon Europe, Digital Europe and in the framework of National Recovery and Resilience 
Facility. 
While the AI Regulation blandly mention to the possibility of providing users with training 
on Artificial Intelligence, ETUCE emphasises that it is crucial that sustainable public funding 
are provided at national and European level to ensure that teachers, trainers, academics 
and other education personnel receive up-to-date and free of charge continuous training 
and professional development on the use of AI tools in accordance with their professional 
needs. 
EdTech expansion and issues of intellectual property rights, data privacy of teachers:  
ETUCE points out that the development of the use of Artificial Intelligence in education has 
been accompanied by the expansion of Ed-tech companies that are progressively 
increasing their influence in the education sector, especially under the pressure of 
emergency online teaching and learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. ETUCE reminds 
that education is a human right and public good whose value needs to be protected. ETUCE 
calls for further public responsibility from national governments that should not limit their 
scope to regulating the EdTech sector and should develop and implement public platforms 
for online teaching and learning to protect the public value of education. In addition, public 
platforms should be implemented in full respect of professional autonomy of teachers and 
education personnel as well as academic freedom and autonomy of education institutions, 
without creating pressure on teachers and education personnel regarding the education 
material and pedagogical methods they use. It is also essential to protect the accountability 
and transparency in the governance of public education systems from the influence of 
private and commercial interests and actors. 

AI tools storing a vast amount of data cause inevitable risks on data protection, privacy and 
intellectual property rights of teachers and academics and other education personnel. 
ETUCE highlights that ensuring data protection and privacy of teachers and students should 
be a priority of the AI Regulation and calls on the EU Commission and the Member States 
to develop appropriate data-retention policies applicable to Artificial Intelligence in 
education, in the respect of national competencies in education. 
Equality and inclusion in the design and use of AI in education: 
As enshrined in the EU Pillar of Social Rights and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, nondiscrimination in education is a fundamental principle of our society. In this regard, the EU 
Commission’s proposal states that the AI regulation “will minimise the risks of erroneous or 
biased AI-assisted decision on education and training”. In this context, ETUCE recognizes 
that the use of Artificial Intelligence has the potential to advance the quality of life and 
inclusion of teachers and students in education. Nonetheless, the persistent lack of 
diversity and underrepresentation of women, ethnic minorities, Black People and 
disadvantaged groups in the population of professionals responsible for designing, testing 
and training the algorithms and data of AI tools translate in the presence of biases in AI 
tools, leading to a detrimental impact on inclusion and equality in education. Therefore, 
ETUCE calls on the European Commission and Member States to provide adequate public 
investment to encourage more diversity in the STEAM sector and ensure that AI tools are 
designed and used with the full representation of the wide society. 
Besides, research shows that cyber-violence, cyber-bullying and cyber-harassment have 
increased with the development of digitalisation in education. ETUCE underlines that it is 
important to further explore how Artificial Intelligence systems can act as supporting tools 
to detect and counter cyber-violence, cyber-bullying and cyber-harassment. 
*The European Trade Union Committee for Education (ETUCE) represents 127 Education 
Trade Unions and 11 million teachers in 51 countries of Europe. ETUCE is a Social Partner 
in education at the EU level and a European Trade Union Federation within ETUC, the 
European Trade Union Confederation. ETUCE is the European Region of Education 
International, the global federation of education trade unions. 