 1 | P a g e 
HOPE Position Paper 
on Artificial Intelligence 
AI technology starts to be used across the healthcare sector but still not as routine. This can be to 
assist research by better matching patients to clinical trials, to support the planning of care for patients 
with complex needs, etc. Prospective uses of artificial intelligence can be found also in robot care 
support and speech recognition for medical documentation. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a complex phenomenon that is interfering with the way medical research 
is conducted, the biomedical data is used, and the healthcare professions and healthcare 
organisations are regulated. 
Health data is recognised as a special category of data under the General Data Protection Regulation 
due to its sensitivity. 
AI uses in the healthcare field would then also requires a specific regulatory approach, in addition to 
a strong horizontal cross-sector regulation of AI. 
HOPE key recommendations to ensure that the application of AI in healthcare benefit patients and 
consumers are as follows: 
We need to agree at European level on a definition of Artificial intelligence for health care as a basis 
for further discussion from an ethical or legal perspective or to be used to determine requirements 
for the quality of AI. 
We need to build action on AI on clear citizens’ rights (and not only when they are patients): 
right to transparency, explanation and objection; 
right to accountability and control; 
right to fairness; 
right to non-discrimination; 
right to safety and security; 
right to access to justice; 
right to reliability and robustness. 
The well-being and autonomy of the AI user should have priority. AI should support the user but not 
restrict the user’s autonomy. 

 2 | P a g e 
The effects of AI on social and environmental aspects should also be examined. It is important in the 
development of AI not only to adopt individual perspectives but also to take society as a whole into 
consideration. It appears useful to establish clarity as to the conditions under which AI processes can 
be used, especially in view of the medical device regulation. 
We need professionals ready for AI 
The EU and the Member States should conduct regulatory assessments of the medical professions 
frameworks to determine whether they are fit for the use of patient/consumer-centred AI in health. 
The EU and Member States should put in place mechanisms to ensure professional and educational 
assistance to both patients and the healthcare professionals to better understand and assess AI 
decision-making. 
We need good quality AI 
The EU should facilitate the identification and should promote good practices ensuring robustness of 
AI systems in the health sector both at the stages of development and actual use to reduce potential 
biases and errors of AI-based decision-making. 
Mechanisms should be in place to make sure developers of AI systems are competent to do so in 
healthcare sector. 
We need adapted legislation 
Ethics are a fundamental component for healthcare research and professions. However, an AI ethical 
code is not sufficient. AI needs that the existing regulatory frameworks are adapted and that a 
comprehensive AI legislation is created. 
The EU should update the EU safety and liability legislation that is relevant to the healthcare sector to 
ensure that it is still accurate and that citizens are well protected with regards to the use of AI. 
The EU and the Member States should ensure that the new Medical Devices Regulation and In-Vitro 
Diagnostic Regulation are implemented with a view to include artificial intelligence: guidelines and 
specifications or the evaluation of safety and effectiveness of software, AI and deep learning powered 
devices throughout the entire usage cycle. 
The EU and Member States must ensure that AI in healthcare is applied in full respect of EU data 
protection rules, while observing the balance between the interests of advancements in medical 
research and citizen protection. This must be achieved through diligent implementation of the GDPR 
principles and adequate use of provisions and exemptions on health research. 

 3 | P a g e 
During the evaluation and review report of the EU data protection legislation, the European 
Commission should specifically evaluate the need to establish rules on: anonymization techniques of 
health data; data access and control when it comes to use of data coming from multiply sources; and 
quality and safety standards for all information systems where health data is processed. 
The EU should establish a legal framework for AI integrating the specifics of healthcare. 
Finally, financing such innovation and in particular adapting the hospital financing to its development 
will have to be considered carefully by Member states. 
HOPE, the European Hospital and Healthcare Federation, is a European non-profit organisation, 
created in 1966. HOPE represents national public and private hospitals associations and hospitals 
owners either federations of local and regional authorities or national health services. Today, HOPE is 
made up of 36 organisations coming from the 27 Member States of the European Union, as well as 
from the United Kingdom, Switzerland and Serbia as observer members. HOPE mission is to promote 
improvements in the health of citizens throughout Europe, high standard of hospital care and to foster 
efficiency with humanity in the organisation and operation of hospital and healthcare services. 