Copyright Euralarm © 2021, Zug, Switzerland 
Position Paper 
EURALARM position on EC proposal for a Regulation on Artificial 
Intelligence – 7 July 2021 
1. Introduction 
Euralarm, the European association representing the electronic fire safety and security industry, welcomes the 
opportunity provided by the European Commission to give comments and suggestions on their proposal for a 
REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL LAYING DOWN HARMONISED 
RULES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACT) AND AMENDING CERTAIN UNION 
LEGISLATIVE ACTS. 
Euralarm welcomes the proposal from the European Commission. We are convinced that the uptake of artificial 
intelligence is dependent on the trust of the users and the general public for this technology and their general 
acceptance of it. The proposal for a legislation on the existing concerns is certainly a way to help this uptake by 
avoiding national legislative initiatives. 
This paper focuses on proposals and comments regarding the following aspects of the proposed AI Act: 
definition of AI system 
prohibition of real-time remote biometric identification 
classification as high-risk 
common specifications. 
Besides these focal points, Euralarm generally supports the more detailed comments from Orgalim. 
2. Proposals and comments on proposed AI Act 
2.1. Definition of AI system 
Article 3(1) of the proposal writes: 
“‘artificial intelligence system’ (AI system) means software that is developed with one or more of the 
techniques and approaches listed in Annex I and can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, generate 
outputs such as content, predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing the environments they 
interact with.” 
Reading this definition together with the techniques listed in Annex I tends to be understood as that any software 
should be considered as an AI system. Any software is produced by a logic-based approach, many software make 
use of statistics (calculating an average is making use of statistics) and knowledge-based approach can be 
understood as an approach based on the knowledge of the software developer. Such an understanding of AI system 
is by far too broad and not proportionate. From the discussions we had with the European Commission, we 
understand that the EC wishes to be as broad as possible in order to be future proof but also wants to focus on 
software generating outputs by itself as opposed to software generating outputs based on pre-determined rules (IF 
this THEN that). According to EC, the keywords to reflect this intention in the definition are “generate outputs“. From 
our reading, it appears that the intention is not clearly reflected by the wording proposed by the EC. 
Euralarm proposal: Art 3(1) should be changed to: “artificial intelligence system’ (AI system) means software 
that is developed with one or more of the techniques and approaches listed in Annex I and can, for a given 
set of human-defined objectives, generate outputs by itself (based on self-generated rules, not on predetermined rules) such as content, predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing the 
environments they interact with”. 

Position Paper on EC proposal for a Regulation on AI 
2.2. Prohibition of real-time remote biometric identification 
Article 5(1)(d) writes that the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces 
for the purpose of law enforcement is prohibited. From the discussions we had with the European Commission on 
this article, we understand that ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification activated for private purposes other than 
law enforcement are not prohibited by the Act. We also understand that having the feature for ‘real-time’ remote 
biometric identification for law enforcement in an AI system is not per se prohibited. It is the activation of this function 
that is prohibited by the Act (with the proposed exceptions to this prohibition). 
Euralarm proposal: In order to better emphasise the focus on the activation, we propose to change the 
introductory sentence in Article 5(1)(d) by: “the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification function of 
an AI system in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement, unless and in as far as such 
use is strictly necessary for one of the following objectives: […]” 
2.3. Classification as high-risk 
Article 6(1)(b) intends to make use of the classification already set in other directives and regulations by considering 
that if the safety component of a product requires third-party conformity assessment, then the AI system is classified 
as high-risk. This probably works for certain directives and regulations but also some friction is identified when 
considering the Radio Equipment Directive. The RED provides 4 essential requirements: 
3(1)(a) protection of health and safety 
3(1)(b) electromagnetic compatibility 
3(2) efficient use of radio spectrum 
3(3) additional essential requirements enforced by DAs. 
The one that can be considered as addressing the safety component is Article 3(1)(a) and this one never requires 
third-party assessment according to Article 17(2) of the RED. Articles 3(2) and 3(3) require third-party assessment 
in case no harmonised standard cited in the OJEU is used but these 2 articles are not addressing safety components 
of the product. Hence, the conformity assessment procedure can be hybrid with self-assessment for few essential 
requirements and third-party assessment for the rest. It is therefore unclear how Article 6(1)(b) should be understood 
in the particular case of the RED. 
Euralarm proposal: Focusing on the safety component aspect which could be enlarged to security aspects, 
we propose to clarify the case of the RED by identifying the essential requirements related to safety and 
security, i.e. Articles 3(3)(e) on privacy and 3(3)(f) on protection from fraud when they are enforced by their 
corresponding delegated act. We therefore propose to add the following to item 6 of Annex II: “[…] limited to 
Articles 3(3)(e) and 3(3)(f) as from the date the transition period laid down in their respective delegated act 
is expired”. 
Euralarm also wishes a clear distinction between AI systems generating decisions as an output vs. AI systems 
generating recommendations as an output. The former, where classified as high-risk, shall be accompanied by 
human oversight according to the proposed Regulation and Euralarm agrees with this. To the opposite, the latter 
provides a recommendation to be converted to a decision via a human intervention. As an example, we can 
consider an AI system within an alarm receiving centre taking into account a large number of parameters to generate 
as an output whether the received alarm is recommended to be considered as a true or a false alarm. The operator 
will then intervene and take the decision on whether the response authorities have to be called or not. Such an AI 
system could be considered as high-risk due to item 5(c) in Annex III of the proposed Regulation. Euralarm believes 
that an AI system requiring by its intended use a human intervention for the final decision should not be classified as 
high-risk. 
Euralarm proposal: We propose to add a third paragraph to Article 6 writing: “The classification as high-risk 
as a consequence of Article 6(2) shall be disregarded for AI systems which intended use demonstrates that 
the generated output is a recommendation requiring a human intervention to convert this recommendation 
into a decision”. 
2.4. Common specifications 
Article 41 introduces the possibility to develop technical specifications out of the framework defined by the Regulation 
on standardisation (1025/2012). This new way of developing technical specifications is seen as a risk at various 
levels: 
having 2 different kinds of technical specifications would lack of clarity when the manufacturer does his risk 
analysis and tries to identify the appropriate specification; 

Position Paper on EC proposal for a Regulation on AI 
having 2 different processes with different actors and about no coordination between both brings the risk of 
overlapping scopes and uncertainty on the technical specification to be applied for a particular AI system; 
standards produced by the ESOs are considered as the state of the art and it is unclear yet how the common 
specifications could get the same consideration; 
the process for elaborating these common specifications is unknown: will it be based on consensus, will there 
be a voting process, who will have the right to vote, what happens in case the industry demonstrates the 
impossibility to fulfil or to test certain requirements? 
We also acknowledge the fact that the EC has been unsatisfied by the deliverables provided by the ESOs during the 
recent years and therefore tries to find an escape route in case of urgent situations. Hence, we could understand the 
need for such a provision but with more guarantees on the exceptional use of it. 
Euralarm proposal: Either remove Article 41 or rewrite it as proposed by Orgalim in their position paper on 
the same topic. 
3. Conclusions 
Euralarm would like to thank DG CONNECT for the opportunity to comment on their proposal, for the exchange we 
had on this topic and for the consideration they will give to our comments and proposals. 
Euralarm has put forward several proposals supported by specific arguments. We remain available to further discuss 
these comments and proposals and the possible ways forward. We believe that the proposals suggested in this 
position paper would contribute to the clearer regulatory environment which could stimulate the uptake of trustworthy 
AI in the EU economy. We look forward to working with the Commission and all stakeholders involved to build a 
future for AI that will be legally certain and enable the fast evolving of this technology to take full advantage of the 
tremendous opportunities in Europe. 
About Euralarm 
Euralarm represents the fire safety and security industry, providing leadership and expertise for industry, market, 
policy makers and standards bodies. Our members make society safer and secure through systems and services for 
fire detection and extinguishing, intrusion detection, access control, video monitoring, alarm transmission and alarm 
receiving centres. Founded in 1970, Euralarm represents over 5000 companies within the fire safety and security 
industry valued at 67 billion Euros. Euralarm members are national associations and individual companies from 
across Europe. 
Gubelstrasse 11 • CH-6300 Zug • Switzerland 
E: secretariat@euralarm.org 
W: www.euralarm.org 
DISCLAIMER 
This document is intended solely for guidance of Euralarm members, and, where applicable, their members, on the 
state of affairs concerning its subject. Whilst every effort has been made to ensure its accuracy, readers should not 
rely upon its completeness or correctness, nor rely on it as legal interpretation. Euralarm will not be liable for the 
provision of any incorrect or incomplete information. 
Note: The English version of this document, GD-2021-014, is the approved Euralarm reference document 