EuroGeographics feedback on EU 
Artificial Intelligence Act proposal 
Ref no.2021-00037.LT 
TR 51080067776-74 
Brussels, 2021 
Key points: 
Legal certainty, risk assessment levels, regulated use, and concept of trust by increasing 
the trust for EU made AI products are the main benefits of the proposal from 
Eurogeographics members’ point of view. 
The coherence of this Regulation proposal with the Commission’s overall digital and data 
strategy is very much appreciated. 
EuroGeographics members’ authoritative data, high quality datasets, are back bones to 
many of the critical infrastructures as defined in the proposed Regulation. 
This Regulation represents a good start for regulated development and deployment of AI 
systems within geo spatial community. 
We understand that the Commission intends to revise the Liability legal framework by 
taking into account innovative technologies including AI, and we will be reviewing these 
with a specific interest. 
EuroGeographics is an independent international not-for-profit organisation representing Europe’s 
National Mapping, Cadastral and Land Registration Authorities (NMCAs). We are a passionate 
advocate for European geospatial data from official trusted sources, in particular when it is 
harmonised to standard specifications. We are providers of a range of products and services and 
expertise which supports navigation, automated vehicles management, emergency response, a 
reliable and secure land and property market, fiscal and many more government and business 
decisions and services. 
NMCAs developments of AI systems is still very much at proof-of-concept stage. However, our sector 
has proved its ability to embrace new technologies and we reckon that what is new now will certainly 
go mainstream soon. 

At this stage, EuroGeograpphics members are both, AI users and providers of data that are very widely 
feeding AI services and business. AI is used for processing geospatial information, in particular for 
increasing the efficiency of their quality assurance and management – the calling card of NMCA data. 
For example, some of our members have been combining high-resolution elevation analysis with deep 
learning techniques, to provide policy-makers with vital information for the transition to solar energy, 
exploring how to use AI for a wide range of activities including land cover mapping and the creation 
of 3D data is high on the agenda. 
Furthermore, our members have fully embraced the European strategy for data, and they already 
contribute substantially to make it a success story. The crucial contribution is primarily by 
implementing the Open data and PSI directive, which will establish trusted mechanisms and services 
for the re-use, sharing and pooling of data that are essential for the development of data-driven AI 
models of high quality. 
The Regulation proposal confirms that some areas of AI deployment will fall under existing legislation 
and will be fully coherent with the Commission’s overall digital strategy. This is a strong stir for our 
members, since the stable governance principles and data protection established thereof, encourages 
our members to create and test high–risk AI systems, for example in the transport field. This possibility 
will provide many opportunities for NMCAs to contribute to the digital single market. The 
development of programmes, research, projects, or support, that will allow the growing of the 
diffusion of AI within our member organizations, will be highly welcomed. 
We are aware that this Regulation applies to providers placing on the market or putting into service 
AI systems and we are not there yet. Nevertheless, our members' authoritative data, high quality 
datasets, are back bones to many of the critical infrastructures as defined in the proposed Regulation. 
In recent years, we have seen an explosion in location-based AI systems. Some of our members are 
already in the testing phase of geospatial data-based AI applications, and this regulatory framework 
is the supportive direction for that, which is considered a good start. 
The Regulation proposal has positively raised awareness of AI and is intended to balance very sensitive 
issues such as fundamental rights, public safety, and innovation. It is highly desirable to have 
definitions in a flexible manner, not to hamper innovations. 
Legal certainty, risk assessment levels, regulated use, and concept of trust by increasing the trust for 
EU made AI products are the main benefits of the proposal from Eurogeographics members’ point of 
view. 
We express our interest in further development of this legal debate. If you need any further 
clarifications, please do not hesitate to contact: lea.bodossian@eurogeographics.org 
Léa Bodossian 
Secretary General & Executive Director 
w. www.eurogeographics.org 
e. lea.bodossian@eurogeographics.org 
m. + 32 485 68 79 05 
EuroGeographics Head Office 
Rue du Nord 76/Noordstraat 76 
1000 Brussels, BELGIUM 