Education International 
Internationale de l'Education 
Internacional de la Educación 
http://www.ei-ie.org 
EUROPEAN REGION- 
ETUCE 
President 
Larry FLANAGAN 
Vice-Presidents 
Odile CORDELIER 
Andreas KELLER 
Trudy KERPERIEN 
Dorte LANGE 
Galina MERKULOVA 
Branimir STRUKELJ 
Boulevard Bischoffsheim, 15 
1000 Brussels, Belgium 
Tel +32 2 224 06 91/92 
Fax +32 2 224 06 94 
secretariat@csee-etuce.org 
http://www.csee-etuce.org 
European Director 
Susan FLOCKEN 
Treasurer 
Joan DONEGAN 
ETUCE 
European Trade Union Committee for Education 
EI European Region 
ETUCE position on the EU Regulation on Artificial Intelligence 
(Adopted by the ETUCE Bureau on 7 June 2021) 
Background: 
On 21 April 2021, the European Commission published a proposal for a “Regulation on a 
European Approach for Artificial intelligence” (the AI Regulation). With this proposal, the 
European Commission follows up on its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence (February 
2020), based on the results of a broad consultation process to which ETUCE contributed. 
The aim of the initiative is to establish the first EU legal framework regulating the entire 
lifecycle of the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in all sectors, including education. 
The AI Regulation classifies the use of Artificial Intelligence in various sectors based on the 
risk that the AI tools have on the health and safety and the fundamental rights of 
individuals. Concerning education, the proposal considers the use of Artificial Intelligence 
tools in education as high-risk as potentially harmful to the right to education and training 
as well as the right not to be discriminated in education. For high-risk sectors, the AI 
Regulation establishes stricter horizontal legal requirements to which AI tools must comply 
before being authorised on the market. These include risk management system during the 
entire lifecycle of the AI system. 
Following the publication of the proposal, on 26 April 2021, the European Commission 
issued a public consultation that will run until 20 July 2021, accompanied by an impact 
assessment report. 
The following text is the ETUCE response to the public consultation bringing the perspective 
of teachers, academics and other education personnel on the sections of the AI Regulation 
that touch upon the education sector. 
ETUCE reply: 
ETUCE welcomes the publication of the AI Regulation as it sets the ground for the first 
comprehensive EU regulation on Artificial Intelligence to ensure a controlled development 
of AI tools in education and address the risks connected to their use by teachers, academic, 
other education personnel and students. While ETUCE recognises the potential of digital 
technologies and Artificial Intelligence tools to bring about improvements in education, it 
also underlines the numerous ethical concerns related to their trustworthiness, data 
privacy, accountability, transparency and their impact on equality and inclusion in 
education. ETUCE underlines that further research at national and European level is needed 
to assess and address the risks connected to the use of Artificial Intelligence in education 
with constant and meaningful consultation with education social partners. 

AI in education as a high-risk: 
ETUCE welcomes that the AI Regulation classifies the use of AI tools in education and 
vocational training as high-risk underlining that “When improperly designed and used, such 
systems may violate the right to education and training as well as the right not to be 
discriminated against and perpetuate historical patterns of discrimination”. ETUCE 
emphasises that the EU Commission initiative should ensure that the development of 
Artificial Intelligence in education does not infringe the human right of all individuals to 
have equal access to quality education. This is enshrined in the first and third principles of 
the European Pillar of Social Rights and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights. 
ETUCE supports the European Commission’s proposal to set stricter horizontal legal 
requirements for the AI tools used in the education sector. The AI Regulation proposal also 
foresees the establishment of a risk management system to analyse the risks associated 
with the use of the AI tools in education and monitor them during the entire lifecycle of the 
AI tools. In this regard, ETUCE believes that the European Commission should support the 
development of clear and binding measures, including ethical guidelines, to address the 
risks that AI tools pose concerning transparency, accountability, intellectual property rights, 
data privacy, cyber-safety, equality and environmental protection. 
Governance: 
The Proposal for Regulation seeks to establish a governance system leading to the 
establishment of a European Artificial Intelligence Board with the involvement of national 
authorities to monitor the implementation of the regulation. Nevertheless, ETUCE 
underlines that the effective implementation of the AI legislation in education requires the 
meaningful involvement of teachers, academics and education staff as co-creators of 
Artificial Intelligence tools in education. Education trade unions have a crucial role to play 
to addressing the risks of Artificial Intelligence in education and bring the perspective of AI 
users on the implementation of the regulation. It is therefore crucial that education social 
partners are actively involved in the activities of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 
through regular consultations and meaningful social dialogue, both at national and 
European level to monitor the implementation of the regulation and address the risks 
related to the use of Artificial Intelligence in education. 
The role of teachers in education: 
Teachers, academics and other education personnel play a crucial role in fostering the full 
human potential of students and their role in education must be preserved. ETUCE calls on 
the European Commission and the Member States to interdict the Artificial Intelligence 
tools that are designed to replace education personnel or can damage the social value 
and the quality of education. Besides, the AI Regulation should ensure that the 
development of AI in education does not reduce the role of teachers to mere providers of 
instructions but rather serves as a supporting tool for the teaching profession while 

preserving the professional and pedagogical autonomy and academic freedom of teachers 
and academics. 
Transparency and AI literacy and CPD of teachers on AI: 
ETUCE welcomes that the proposal of AI Regulation requires that users of AI tools (who 
include students, teachers, academic and education staff for the education sector) must be 
adequately informed about the intended purpose, level of accuracy, residual risks of AI 
tools. Nevertheless, ETUCE highlights that providing information is not sufficient to ensure 
the transparency of the AI tools when users miss the adequate digital skills and data and AI 
literacy to interpret it. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to improve the importance of 
digital skills, AI literacy and data literacy in educational curricula and raise awareness on 
the risks related to the use of AI tools in education. It is also essential to ensure that 
infrastructures of education institutions are adequately equipped for digital education as 
well as to provide equal access to digital technologies and ICT tools to all teachers and 
students, with particular attention to the most disadvantaged groups. To these purposes, 
sustainable public investment should be provided by national governments and the 
European Commission should provide financial support through European funding such as 
Horizon Europe, Digital Europe and in the framework of National Recovery and Resilience 
Facility. 
While the AI Regulation blandly mention to the possibility of providing users with training 
on Artificial Intelligence, ETUCE emphasises that it is crucial that sustainable public funding 
are provided at national and European level to ensure that teachers, trainers, academics 
and other education personnel receive up-to-date and free of charge continuous training 
and professional development on the use of AI tools in accordance with their professional 
needs. 
EdTech expansion and issues of intellectual property rights, data privacy of teachers:  
ETUCE points out that the development of the use of Artificial Intelligence in education has 
been accompanied by the expansion of Ed-tech companies that are progressively 
increasing their influence in the education sector, especially under the pressure of 
emergency online teaching and learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. ETUCE reminds 
that education is a human right and public good whose value needs to be protected. ETUCE 
calls for further public responsibility from national governments that should not limit their 
scope to regulating the EdTech sector and should develop and implement public platforms 
for online teaching and learning to protect the public value of education. In addition, public 
platforms should be implemented in full respect of professional autonomy of teachers and 
education personnel as well as academic freedom and autonomy of education institutions, 
without creating pressure on teachers and education personnel regarding the education 
material and pedagogical methods they use. It is also essential to protect the accountability 
and transparency in the governance of public education systems from the influence of 
private and commercial interests and actors. 

AI tools storing a vast amount of data cause inevitable risks on data protection, privacy and 
intellectual property rights of teachers and academics and other education personnel. 
ETUCE highlights that ensuring data protection and privacy of teachers and students should 
be a priority of the AI Regulation and calls on the EU Commission and the Member States 
to develop appropriate data-retention policies applicable to Artificial Intelligence in 
education, in the respect of national competencies in education. 
Equality and inclusion in the design and use of AI in education: 
As enshrined in the EU Pillar of Social Rights and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, nondiscrimination in education is a fundamental principle of our society. In this regard, the EU 
Commission’s proposal states that the AI regulation “will minimise the risks of erroneous or 
biased AI-assisted decision on education and training”. In this context, ETUCE recognizes 
that the use of Artificial Intelligence has the potential to advance the quality of life and 
inclusion of teachers and students in education. Nonetheless, the persistent lack of 
diversity and underrepresentation of women, ethnic minorities, Black People and 
disadvantaged groups in the population of professionals responsible for designing, testing 
and training the algorithms and data of AI tools translate in the presence of biases in AI 
tools, leading to a detrimental impact on inclusion and equality in education. Therefore, 
ETUCE calls on the European Commission and Member States to provide adequate public 
investment to encourage more diversity in the STEAM sector and ensure that AI tools are 
designed and used with the full representation of the wide society. 
Besides, research shows that cyber-violence, cyber-bullying and cyber-harassment have 
increased with the development of digitalisation in education. ETUCE underlines that it is 
important to further explore how Artificial Intelligence systems can act as supporting tools 
to detect and counter cyber-violence, cyber-bullying and cyber-harassment. 
*The European Trade Union Committee for Education (ETUCE) represents 127 Education 
Trade Unions and 11 million teachers in 51 countries of Europe. ETUCE is a Social Partner 
in education at the EU level and a European Trade Union Federation within ETUC, the 
European Trade Union Confederation. ETUCE is the European Region of Education 
International, the global federation of education trade unions. 

EI European Region
For an Education-led Recovery
RESOLUTION
Artificial Intelligence in the Education Sector
Adopted by the ETUCE Conference, the Regional Conference of 
Education International, on 5-6 July 2021
Further to and consistent with the Resolutions adopted by the 8th EI Congress in Bangkok in 2019 and the Resolutions 
adopted by the ETUCE Conference in 2020, this ETUCE Conference, 
 Acknowledges that:
1. 
The digital transformation is set to change the world of work and wider societal landscape. Technologies such as 
Artificial Intelligence are increasingly woven into the professional, social and personal lives of individuals. As such, the 
impact of Artificial Intelligence is a matter of growing importance for the education sector and its professionals. Along 
with the spread of Artificial Intelligence technologies in everyday lives, arises the pressing need for individuals to be 
trained to understand the basics of these technologies, as well as their potential risks;
2. 
The growing reliance on Artificial Intelligence for a multitude of purposes, further exacerbated due to the COVID-19 
pandemic and the multiplication of activities previously undertaken physically being transitioned online, therefore 
undoubtedly invites to a wider reflection on the role of these powerful technologies in the daily lives of citizens across 
Europe and its impact on democratic, sustainable societies;
3. 
Artificial Intelligence, whilst being increasingly hailed by decision-makers and tech giants as an innovative technology 
leading to the vast improvement of the life of people, presents opportunities but also real threats to individuals. From 
an ethics perspective, in particular, the ability of machines to influence the choices of human beings risks hindering 
humankind’s independence, free will and creativity;

ETUCECONFERENCE
2021
EI European Region
4. 
Crucially, Artificial Intelligence technologies present ethical concerns when it comes to transparency, accountability, 
data protection, privacy of users, cyber-safety, democracy, freedom of action and choice and discriminatory practices. 
A common understanding of their optimal use is therefore essential for all, in order to engage with them in a critical, 
safe, inclusive, participative and confident approach as early as possible. In such a context, social partners in education 
have a key role in providing their members with the basic skills needed to understand the functioning and safest use 
of Artificial Intelligence. Therefore, in all respects, the use and impact of Artificial Intelligence in the education sector 
is a matter of interest for social partners in education and a legitimate subject of a meaningful and effective social 
dialogue. Therefore education trade unions must be closely involved in the design, development, and monitoring of AI 
technologies introduced in the education sector;
5. 
The preconditioning of online research by algorithms and the collection, storing and analysing of personal information 
by users of digital devices are applications of Artificial Intelligence that have far-ranging implications for the education 
sector and its personnel. These uses of Artificial Intelligence in the education sector, at all levels, involve a wide range 
of areas including employment, pedagogy, assessment, research and administration. Significantly, the potential risks 
from the use of Artificial Intelligence should be addressed; 
6. 
Artificial Intelligence in the education sector must be handled sensibly and carefully, as a high-risk factor giving rise 
to a need for robust and binding ethical guidelines and legislative frameworks, with teachers, trainers, academics and 
other education personnel at the centre of establishing these. This equally supports calls for deeper discussions on the 
role of digital technologies in education.
Notes that:
7. 
Recently, Artificial Intelligence has been the subject of several European and International policy positions and studies, 
including the European Commission Communication on ‘Building Trust in Human-Centric Artificial Intelligence’ (April 
2019), the White Paper on Artificial Intelligence ‘A European approach to excellence and trust’ (February 2020), the 
OECD Recommendation on Artificial Intelligence (May 2019) and Working paper ‘Trustworthy Artificial intelligence (AI) in 
education: Promises and challenges’ (April 2020), the UNESCO Preliminary report on the first draft of the Recommendation 
on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence (December 2020), the Council of Europe Recommendation on developing and 
promoting digital citizenship education (November 2019) and the draft of the UNICEF report: Policy Guidance on AI for 
Children (September 2020). In addition to this, data protection mechanisms and principles common to all European 
Union Member States have been laid out in the 2016 General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR); 
8. 
Artificial Intelligence, as a technology built by human beings with their preconceptions, is fundamentally set to replicate 
conscious or unconscious human bias. While the STEM and IT community remains widely unrepresentative of many 
categories of society, such as women, ethnic minorities, people from a migrant background and people with disabilities, 
there is a pressing need for transparency in algorithmic decision-making, with a view to identifying, addressing and 
tackling discriminatory practices in Artificial Intelligence-powered technologies; 
9. 
Building Artificial Intelligence for educational purposes, should be done by a multi-disciplinary team that also consists 
of academics and researchers from the human sciences to assure that philosophical and ethical concerns can be 
tackled from the beginning;
10. 
Artificial Intelligence used for educational purposes can never replicate nor replace the social and emotional 
engagement of the teaching professional. The role of teachers, trainers, academics and other education personnel 
goes far beyond merely providing instruction. Their ability to engage with students according to their specific needs 
and individuality is a core aspect of inclusive quality education, that must be protected. The act of learning is inherently 
a collective process which is difficult to provide in distance education;

ETUCECONFERENCE
2021
EI European Region
11. 
Teachers, trainers, academics and other education personnel must be trained from the onset and throughout their 
professional career in Artificial Intelligence, its underlying risks, including from their perspective as workers, and its 
possible applications in the educational context. Such training should be available free of charge and developed in 
accordance with education professionals’ needs;
12. 
Artificial Intelligence in the educational context is a matter of concern for education personnel, in terms of teaching and 
as workers. Indeed, Artificial Intelligence in the workplace gives rise to a set of issues regarding the working conditions 
of education personnel, for instance when it comes to privacy issues and the right to disconnect. It is of utmost 
importance that the use of Artificial Intelligence in education institutions does in no way hinder or lessen the protection 
of teaching professional’s rights and equal opportunities, and their professional autonomy. Equally importantly, the 
conditions of Artificial Intelligence tools used in the workplace must be designed in consultation with education trade 
unions;
13. 
The bias inherent in Artificial Intelligence’s analysis and sorting of data presents concerning implications on the working 
conditions of education personnel, and in particular, the recruitment, assessment, and career progression of teachers, 
trainers, academics and other education personnel. This risk calls for absolute transparency in data collection and 
usage, clear accountability processes, as well as for robust protection of workers’ rights. Crucially, at a time when many 
education systems are at least partially resorting to digital education due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but also looking 
beyond, the implications of using Artificial Intelligence on education personnel’s’ working conditions must be included 
in collective bargaining agreements; 
14. 
Artificial Intelligence, when introduced into the educational context, must remain a means to support the work of 
teachers, trainers, academics and other education personnel, in full respect for their professional agency and 
academic freedom. Artificial Intelligence designed to reproduce or replace education personnel jeopardises the social 
and emotional teaching context and damages quality education;
15. 
Calls for the application of Artificial Intelligence in education often allow ed-tech companies to expand their influence in 
the education sector; Protecting the capacity, accountability and transparency in the governance of public education 
systems from the influence and reach of for-profit private commercial interests and actors is therefore of utmost 
importance. This includes public procurement that ensures that funds are used for the public good of education based 
on clear rules and legislation that affirm and require that the services contracted by the public authorities allow for 
social partner engagement and collective bargaining. While the race towards uncovering the potentials of Artificial 
Intelligence is an explicit objective for many decision-makers, Artificial Intelligence and its use in the education sector 
is a matter of public interest and debates around it should, as such, be fully independent of the influence of profit as a 
motive.
16. 
Supporting its member organisations and representatives in making active use of co-determination, data protection 
and personal rights;
17. 
Making sure that their members can acquire the basic skills needed to understand the functioning and use of Artificial 
Intelligence and can assess the risks. This professionalisation policy should be oriented towards the education 
institution’s staff team so that the entire team is involved with respect for the different levels of AI-knowledge in the staff.

ETUCECONFERENCE
2021
EI European Region
To mitigate the adverse risks of Artificial Intelligence for education personnel and students alike, 
ETUCE and its Member Organisations commit to:
18. 
Continuously expanding the knowledge of education trade unions on Artificial Intelligence applied to the education 
sector, and in particular when it comes to its impact on the quality and inclusiveness of education, on the safety 
and well-being of students and education personnel, on the personal pedagogical relationships, on democracy and 
participation in educational institutions and learning processes, and on the working conditions of teachers, trainers, 
academics and other education personnel, including in their recruitment, assessment, and career progression;
19. 
Pursuing research – including the transfer for teachers and students – on the impact of Artificial Intelligence 
technologies in education, not at least as regards inclusion and diversity in education;
20. Advocating for and seeking to contribute to the elaboration of robust legal frameworks and ethical guidelines as regards 
Artificial Intelligence in the education sector, as well as for strict compliance with existing regulations, such as general 
data protection regulations;
21. 
Lobbying national governments and decision-making bodies for the inclusion of education trade unions in the 
development of policies regarding Artificial Intelligence in the education sector, at all levels of education;
22. Raising awareness and fight against on the threat of privatisation and commercialisation in and of education from 
the influence and reach of private ed-tech companies providing Artificial Intelligence tools for educational purposes 
through outsourcing, public-private partnerships, or even through the promotion of reforms embedded in public 
education systems; Pursuing more public responsibility in the development of datafied and algorithmised teaching, 
learning and research processes, for example through stronger regulation of the influence of EdTech companies 
on education and research and through the promotion of publicly, democratically, pedagogically and scientifically 
accountable governance and activities; 
23. The development of software should be done in a more open way to prevent lock-ins like vendor lock-ins. In Europe the 
focus should be more on open source development driven by communities where public actors like research institutes 
can participate alongside software developers and the private sector;
24. Continuing to advocate for respect for the professional autonomy of adequately trained teachers, trainers, academics 
and other education personnel regarding the impact of Artificial Intelligence tools; 
25. Developing a common policy strategy at European level to address and overcome the concerns of education trade 
unions on Artificial Intelligence in education, both in terms of professional issues and working conditions.