08 September 2021 
Rue Marie de Bourgogne, 58 – 1000 Brussels – Tel 0032 2 842 69 82 - www.eucope.org 
AI IN HEALTHCARE: A EUROPEAN 
OPPORTUNITY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
As demonstrated by the fight against COVID-19, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential to drive change 
and improve efficiency and accessibility in healthcare. ​Jin, C., Chen, W., Cao, Y. et al. Development and evaluation of an artificial intelligence system for COVID-19 
diagnosis. Nat Commun 11, 5088 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18685-1 ​  
From compounds design​For example: screening of compounds, automatic design of chemical compounds, appropriate synthetic route to 
make compounds, models to predict efficacy / ADMET properties of compounds ​  in medicines development to faster patient screening and diagnosis to hospital 
management (to name but a few applications), AI-based solutions can help upgrade our healthcare 
systems towards more sustainability, while helping to address patients’ unmet needs. AI represents 
a historic opportunity to redesign healthcare in Europe, but realizing its full potential will require some 
structural, behavioural and societal adjustments. It is undeniable that digital applications and innovations in 
health have not experienced the massive uptake seen in other sectors (e.g. security, finance, automotive). 
As AI’s potential in health attracts interests and enthusiasm, its limitations due to its adaptive nature, data 
availability and appropriate regulatory framework have also come to the fore. In the EU, the COVID-19 
pandemic has accelerated reflections about the role of policy in enabling companies to lead globally in 
digital health and innovation. Leaders need to ensure small to medium-sized companies (SMEs) can access 
capital, data and skills to develop AI-solutions in healthcare. 
As a follow-up to its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence​https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/white-paper-artificial-intelligence-european-approach-excellence-and-trust_en ​ , the European Commission released its Data 
Strategy​https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-data-strategy_en ​  which aims to boost healthcare data sharing and interoperability through the creation of a 
European Health Data Space​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=COM:2018:0232:FIN ​  – which will enable – and further foster – the effective use of AI-related 
technologies in healthcare. Moreover, the European Medicines Agency explicitly highlights the value and 
need for enhanced regulatory clarity for AI in the Regulatory Science Strategy for 2025​https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/regulatory-procedural-guideline/ema-regulatory-science-2025-strategicreflection_en.pdf ​  and the HMA-EMA 
Joint Big Data Taskforce Recommendations. ​https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/other/hma-ema-joint-big-data-taskforce-phase-ii-report-evolving-datadriven-regulation_en.pdf ​  Hence, it appears certain that a fit-for-purpose regulatory 

framework that enables safe data-sharing, accelerates the rollout of personalised medicine and 
diagnostics solutions, and drives innovation in AI is essential in enabling Europe to lead this race. 
AVAILABILITY – DRIVING INNOVATION 
The recent months have seen numerous legislative proposals flourishing in the Member States to allow for 
the reimbursement of digital health solutions, including AI-based solutions. Pricing and reimbursement 
systems need to adapt to ensure the greatest availability of these new products for the benefit of patients 
in Europe. Similar to more traditional medicinal products, the systems for allowing reimbursement vary 
greatly from one country to another, creating disparities amongst European patients. With more and more 
AI-based solutions applying for reimbursement, it is essential Member States come together with 
stakeholders to find a coherent and balanced approach to reimbursement processes. 
2. MAKING IT HAPPEN – BARRIERS TO ADOPTION 
Moving to an environment in which AI-based solutions can deliver significant and consistent improvements 
in healthcare is a long road. Here are the biggest barriers and challenges we see. 
DATA CHALLENGES 
Access to data 
AI relies critically on the availability of rich data. High quality, reliable and interoperable data is the sine qua 
non condition of any solution utilizing artificial intelligence. It is the key to training unbiased, robust and safe 
AI. ​The socio-economic impact of AI in healthcare, Report, October 2020, Eliana Biundo, Andrew Pease, Koen Segers, 
Michael de Groote, Thibault d’Argent, Edouard de Schaetzen. ​  Despite the vast amount of data available in healthcare institutions, or generated in a non-medical 
context​For example, a watch can record health pulse, applying AI to analyze those records can allow to predict/diagnose 
heart attack ​ , the majority is either not accessible, or usable, making the development of AI healthcare solutions 
extremely challenging. 
The other underlying challenge with data accessibility is the fragmented landscape the data providers 
operate in and the variability in data format. Very often, when data is available, the dataset is not viable, 
with systems not able to synthesise data, communicate with and use information from different systems. 
Interoperability and unified standard format are among the main barriers to the adoption of any digital 
health solutions for a long time, and the problem only exacerbates when applied to AI. The siloed 
environment resulting from the very different systems operating in the different countries of the European 
Union makes it very difficult for digital solutions to live up to the expectations. 
Data quality 

Data quality issue is not unique to AI. It is a long-existing problem for any study. Some data collected using 
AI tools can have higher quality than those collected using standard techniques. 
However, due to the fragmented landscape, the data, when available, can be of disparate quality and 
complexity. Curating this information and evaluating its appropriateness for an application in an AI-based 
solution requires a lot of skills, resources and time, which is beyond the scope for smaller biotechs or health 
solutions developers. 
Healthcare data is a very particular type of data. It can influence diagnosis, treatment options, it can expand 
the span of research, it can assess the outcome of a treatment. The quality of such data is paramount 
for the success of AI and even more critically for a patient’s life. 
As for in any medical practice, data needs to be accurate, representative and interpretable to deliver 
meaningful insights. ​Ibidem. ​  A poor dataset can lead to misinterpretation, and in turn, influence another important 
step in patients’ access: the evaluation of AI-based technologies. 
Data disparity 
Combining datasets from different sources, even when they are all high quality, is complicated because of 
their disparity. This disparity is two-fold: 
1. Different entities may not measure the same thing. Studies led by different companies, with different 
objectives, do not necessarily collect the same, or even similar data. Having access to multiple 
datasets of this kind hardly provides any benefit over any single one. 
2. Even when different datasets contain the same measurements, these measurements themselves 
might not be comparable, especially if they are subject to human subjectivity. Different researchers 
do not necessarily come to the same conclusions or scores when presented with the same sample. 
In that perspective, EUCOPE recommends regulators at the EU level to establish a standard set of data 
to be collected and encourage the use of automated tools that allow reproducible data collection enabling 
combining existing datasets. 
Recommendations 
EU Level 
National level 
Define data collection standards​Including on data annotation and labelling ​  
Training healthcare professionals 

Establish a unified standard for data exchange 
Incentives for organizations/vendors that align 
with common data standards 
Promote data interoperability and exchange 
protocol, based on the experience of ERNs 
(Collaboration between several member states on 
the same topic) 
Allow transfer of data between local centres 
Centralise data collection from regional data sets 
REGULATORY CHALLENGES 
Validation process and Reimbursement 
Member States are slowly but surely adopting national legislatures allowing for digital health solutions to 
apply for reimbursement. While it is far from being general practice, the trend is growing, and regulatory 
agencies or Health Technology Assessment (HTA) bodies are adapting their pathways to include the 
assessment of digital health solutions, including AI-based solutions. 
While AI providing health data based on continuous monitoring (both passively and actively) of daily 
activities has a greater potential for reimbursement, the solutions utilizing AI without immediate health 
benefits might find a more challenging process. 
The data set used by the AI applications or used as secondary data (for instance, when an AI-based tool 
provides information on an internal decision point) in the application dossier for HTA, reimbursement 
process or post-marketing studies must be of the highest standards of quality. It is crucial to demonstrate 
the relevance of the data in a lifecycle approach: in the context of approval and, at a later stage, 
reimbursement. Should the regulator dispute the quality and/or the validity of the data used by the algorithm, 
the entire process could be severely delayed, henceforth, delaying access to patients. 
While one can understand the challenge in adapting to an extremely changing world, as well as to the 
massive disruption AI is about to bring to healthcare, it is indisputable that regulators need to issue clear 
guidance on quality requirements for validation processes, reimbursement criteria, and post-marketing 
studies. ​Be it for surveillance or studies in the context of real-world evidence generation. ​  We also call for clearer visibility on the possible evolution of the regulatory framework, to take 
into account the coming development of technology (e.g.: adaptive AI). 

International Cooperation 
The immense value of international cooperation through forums like the International Medical Device 
Regulatory Forum (IMDRF) and ICH
13 helps driving the necessary convergence for global 
companies/access. 
For the EU to close the gap with other important players – the United States of America, Japan or China – 
it needs to provide clearer guiding documents and risk-proportionate requirements so the sector can 
adequately prepare and act in consequence. 
Further guidance is also required when it comes to the flow of data or data transfer for the purpose of 
research. In the case of many rare diseases, most often the patient population in one country, or even one 
continent is not enough to have a sufficient dataset to ensure proper clinical research. In that case, the 
transfer of data between research institutions has proven very efficient in bridging this deficit. The General 
Data Protection Regulation represents a proud asset of the EU’s arsenal to safeguard personal data, and 
rightly so. The regulation offers some provisions in relation to data for scientific and research purposes, but 
more clarity, notably on the ability to transfer pseudonymized research data out of the EU, is absolutely 
crucial. 
Another important aspect that would require more clarity is the question of Intellectual Property (IP). As 
an AI model itself and the data used to create that model are strongly related to each other, the owner, and 
therefore the ownership of IP rights of such AI model can become unclear. Clear definitions and potential 
adjustments to IP legislation should be produced to clarify the legal framework. 
The European Commission is about to publish some ambitious legislative proposals in the field of AI, and 
EUCOPE and its members welcome such prioritization of AI, especially in the healthcare sector. It is 
imperative, however, that the additional regulations or guidance documents do not represent a further 
barrier to the adoption of AI services, but rather act as an accelerator to stimulate innovation, to the 
benefit of the EU competitiveness, and ultimately, to the benefits of European patients. 
Recommendations 
EU Level 
National level 
Ensure appropriate incentives to foster innovation 
Free flow of data for research purposes 
Clear guidance on quality requirements for HTA 
Set of criteria enabling faster reimbursement 
13 International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use 

Appropriate data-sharing framework to foster 
collaboration between academia and industry 
Clarify Intellectual Property rights 
Provision of regulatory support from EMA and, 
where appropriate, from ECDC 
Provide specific training for regulatory and 
reimbursement professionals 
Ensure value-based assessment 
Harmonise regulations across the Member States 
ORGANISATIONAL AND SOCIAL CHALLENGES 
Digitalisation and AI inclusion will require substantial investments in many areas. Such an investment 
can prove to be burdensome and challenging for smaller biotechs and pharmaceutical companies. Without 
proper support from external actors (public sector, investors), some medical technologies developers might 
hesitate to make that effort, with an uncertain return on investment. 
We, therefore, call for the European Institutions and regulatory bodies to urgently come up with unified data 
security standard across platforms, industries, countries, etc, such that the barriers in data transfer, storage 
and analysis can be minimized. 
The European Union is home to leading technologies and excellence centres in the world, with 
supercomputers, AI sandboxes environments and testing centres available. The next European Health 
Data Space will aim to ensure data is easily transferrable and usable by many players, small and big. 
On that basis, EUCOPE calls on the necessary collaboration between private and public stakeholders to 
build trust for investment and ensure access to public infrastructures and capital to smaller 
developers or companies. 
Like any disruptive technology, the adoption of AI-based solutions very much depends on the acceptance 
and utilization by the end-users, be it the health institutions, the healthcare professionals, the payers or the 
patients themselves. Trust in data management, in its governance, its transparency, is paramount to full 
adoption by the larger public. Too often we have seen new technologies being overhyped and not living to 
the expectations because of lack of trust from the end-users. Let’s learn from past examples and make 
sure proper training and education are in place. 
Recommendations 
EU Level 
National level 
Provide legal frameworks to ensure public trust 
Provide specific training and education for the 
public 

Allow access to public infrastructures 
Build a network of AI centres 
Ensure a balanced approach to favour ethics and 
governance without hampering innovation 
Provide a stimulus for investments in AI, including 
via small venture companies and academia 
Include digital literacy in professional training and 
education 
Ensure coherence between local, regional fund 
structures and EU funding programmes. 
3. CONCLUSION 
AI-based solutions can help upgrade our healthcare systems towards more sustainability, while 
helping to address patients’ unmet needs. To realise this potential, it appears certain that a fit-forpurpose regulatory framework that enables safe data-sharing, accelerates the rollout of personalised 
medicine and diagnostics solutions, and drives innovation in AI is essential. 
Important hurdles remain for the EU to lead this race (data challenges, clear guidance on quality 
requirements for validation processes), but the plans from the European Commission indicate a strong 
ambition from policymakers. We believe it is paramount that any upcoming legislative steps act as an 
accelerator to stimulate innovation, to the benefit of the EU competitiveness, and ultimately, to the 
benefits of European patients. 
EUCOPE – the European Confederation of Pharmaceutical Entrepreneurs 
EUCOPE is Europe’s trade body for small to medium-sized innovative companies working in the field of 
pharmaceuticals and medical technologies. 
Based in Brussels, EUCOPE gives voice to more than 900 research-orientated innovative companies and 
associations active in research, development of pharmaceuticals, biotechnologies and medical devices. 
Many of its members are developing therapeutic solutions for persons living with a rare disease, who had 
little to no treatment available just a few years ago.  
For further information please contact: 
Laurent Louette: 
EUCOPE Communications & Public Affairs 
louette@eucope.org 
+32 (0) 2 842 69 85 