[Status] 
EIT Health AI consultation response 
 EIT Health welcomes the proposed AI Regulation and its ambition to create horizontal 
legislation overseeing AI and to maximise the safety and trustworthiness of this technology. 
We welcome the creation of a risk-classification of AI and prohibition of certain AI in 
alignment with the OECD, as this type of risk management is vital to ensuring uptake of this 
important technology. 
 With the importance of AI in the healthcare context in mind, the AI Act should support – not 
supress – innovation. Additional requirements and conformity assessments imposed by the 
foreseen legislation should therefore be combined or simplified to the greatest extent 
possible, and accompanied by clear guidance and support to innovators of all sizes to 
provide certainty and ensure they are not inhibited by additional regulatory requirements. 
 To avoid delays both in terms of innovations coming to market and patient access to new 
technologies and treatments, notified bodies and other authorities should be supported by 
the EU to ensure they are able to assess AI coming to market quickly whilst complying with 
the necessary safety assessments. 
 We welcome the European AI Board but stress the need for cohesion with other EU level 
boards to ensure complete harmonisation of legislation to reduce regulatory burden. The 
proposed independent expert group is a positive inclusion, and EIT Health would welcome 
the opportunity to participate to provide insight and real-world evidence generated from its 
network of health innovators. 
 Other stakeholders within the healthcare ecosystem need to be supported in the uptake 
and use of AI, notably patients and healthcare professionals. Appropriate education and 
upskilling on all the relevant aspects of AI and its utility in healthcare should be incorporated 
within existing and future curricula, and continued professional education for healthcare 
professionals is a vital foundational step. EIT Health’s education pillar has trained or 
educated 43,000 graduates and professionals, through activities including Summer Schools, 
Fellowships and Master’s/PhD programmes. On AI specifically, the EIT Health project HelloAI 
RES Online (https://eithealth.eu/project/helloairis/) was designed to introduce medical 
professionals to AI and equip them with the skills needed to allow them to benefit from the 
ongoing evolution of the healthcare field. 
 The proposed Regulation must have appropriate flexibility to accommodate sector specific 
issues, notably in health, where the risks are greater and the level of regulation already high. 
The proposal finds itself overlapping with many health sector specific and horizontal 
legislation (DGA, EHDS, MDR, IVDR, EHDS) and appropriate measures must be taken to 
ensure that health innovation is still allowed to thrive whilst of course ensuring patient 
safety. 
 Further clarity is needed on how healthcare AI outside of the scope of the MDR and IVDR 
will be regulated, notably when used for research purposes. 

[Status] 
 Finally, EIT Health welcomes the assurances created by looking at the whole value chain, 
and calls upon the Commission to find the right balance between support for innovation and 
building public trust in clear regulation, enabling safe and secure exchange of data and the 
development of new innovative AI. 