1
Disrupted 
Ch
 ldhood 
The Cost of Persuasive Design
Authors 
Baroness Kidron 
Alexandra Evans 
Jenny Afia
With contributions from 
Prof. Joanna R Adler 
Dr. Henrietta Bowden-Jones 
Dr. Liam Hackett 
Anisha Juj 
Prof. Andrew K Przybylski 
Dr. Angharad Rudkin 
Young Scot 5Rights Youth Leadership Group

Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank all contributors, 
including the many academics upon whose 
work we have built: the 5Rights’ network 
of companies, organisations and individuals 
who support the rights of children in 
the digital environment and, most of all, 
the children and young people with whom 
we work. Particularly the Scottish 5Rights 
Youth Commission convened by Young 
Scot; their insights are endlessly thoughtful 
and pragmatic.
We would also like to thank Parentzone 
and the PSHE Association for canvassing 
the voices of parents and teachers; the 5Rights 
team; the law firm Schillings, who generously 
supported the publication of this report; 
and also Headland Consultancy for their 
support for its launch.
June 2018

Executive summary 
04
Foreword 
10
Introduction 
11
Chapter One 
12 
Children are struggling 
to put down their devices 
Chapter Two 
15 
The commercial imperative
Chapter Three 
20 
The strategies to keep users online 
— The rush (dopamine) 
— Popularity contest 
— Summonses: buzzes, 
 pings, vibrations and 
 the colour red 
— Losing time 
— Social obligation 
— Emotional highs
Chapter Four 
27 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood
Chapter Five 
36 
Seeds of change
Endnotes 
39
Authors & contributors 
43
About 5Rights Foundation 

04
Executive summary 
The battle for children’s attention has been characterised by how much 
time they spend online. As online and offline lives are increasingly blended, 
it is no longer helpful or feasible to distinguish between the two. What 
we must now urgently consider, is what children are doing and why. 
If we continue to allow the persuasive design features to dominate the 
decisions children make online, we are in danger of stunting the creativity 
and development of a generation. This has far-reaching consequences for 
individual children, families and society. We urgently need to consider 
whether children are autonomous, respected and protected online.
The Disrupted Childhood Report explains commonly-used strategies, 
and highlights how automated technology both leverages and reinforces 
human instinct, in order to trigger habits and behaviours. Variously called 
‘reward loops’, ‘captology’, ‘sticky’, ‘dwell features’ and ‘extended use 
strategies’, persuasive design strategies are deliberately baked into digital 
services and products in order to capture and hold users’ attention and 
imprint habitual behaviours. Habits and behaviours formed before 
9 years old take significant intervention to change.
1 
The costs for children, who in the report call for fairer treatment, 
are palpable. They include personal anxiety, social aggression, 
denuded relationships, sleep deprivation and impact on education, 
health and wellbeing. At the same time, the current regime 
of data surveillance, fuelled by persuasive design, raises ethical, 
moral and legal questions. 
The Disrupted Childhood Report, published by 
5Rights Foundation, explains how persuasive design 
strategies, deployed to maximise the collection of 
personal data, impact on children’s social, mental 
and physical development. It questions the legitimacy 
of commoditising childhood and sets out a series of 
practical and immediately applicable recommendations 
for the tech sector, Government, parents and investors.
“ The system is failing… social networks — they 
are man-made. If they are not serving humanity, 
they can and should be changed.” 
— Sir Tim Berners-Lee 

05
The report 
concludes 
that:
Executive summary 
Industry insiders, unhappy with compulsive strategies, demand 
that the technology sector operate within a fully-described set 
of ethical and social standards. Their powerful words indicate a broader 
discontent throughout civil society. The seeds of change are seen in 
the increasing focus of policy makers, the media and concerned adults 
on the costs for children of persuasive and habit-forming design.
Digital technology promises unlimited potential for children and society. 
To fulfil its promise it must be deployed in a way that is accountable and 
proactively meets the needs of its child users. Services and products 
should be required to anticipate the vulnerabilities associated with 
the different ages and developmental stages of childhood in order 
to fully realise their potential.
Whilst acknowledging the recent steps taken by some technology 
companies on behalf of younger users, it remains the case that digital 
services have consistently failed to prioritise the needs of children 
over those of shareholders. The report argues that self-regulation 
has proven inadequate and that standards delivered universally 
in the ‘best interests of the child’,
2 should be set by society, 
not Silicon Valley.
The passage of the Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA), with its 
Age-Appropriate Design Code, offers a unique opportunity to 
create a children’s data protection regime that offers children 
respect and protection. The question remains whether it will 
be fully embraced by all stakeholders and robustly enforced. 
 As long as the digital environment deploys persuasive 
strategies for primarily commercial purposes, it will fail to 
live up to its promise of progress, creativity and knowledge.
 It is unreasonable to design services to be compulsive, and then 
reprimand children for being preoccupied with their devices. 
 Children are overwhelmed
3 and require more intentional 
use of digital technologies,
4 and more time out. 
 Services must be designed to anticipate the rights 
and needs of children.
 The development of a global governance system for the 
digital technology sector must be a priority for governments 
and international institutions. 
The Disrupted Childhood Report highlights the urgent 
need to ensure that the design of digital services 
and products is appropriate for children. It proposes 
the following recommendations to make that possible. 

06
Executive summary 
Recommendations 
We call on industry to
 1 
Recognise compulsive use of technology as a public health issue. 
 2 
 Design all services to make it as frictionless to get offline as it currently 
is to get online. For example, by designing into services;
— Autoplay default off, and if changed, switch back to ‘off’ once a child logs 
out or navigates away.
— Notifications and summonses default off, such as buzzes, read receipts, 
pings and all other non-specific alerts.
— Default streak holidays (and temporary absences from streak-type settings).
—  Save buttons (so children are not forced to stay online to complete a task).
— Time out and disengagement opportunities; standardised, 
easily accessible and frequently offered, even if it is not in services’ 
commercial interests.
5 Including regular reminders of time spent.
—  A barrier to software upgrades that automatically enhance 
or switch persuasive design features back on.
— Alternatives to data collection as a price of entry. 
—  And, stop gathering children’s data for the purpose 
of personalising services to simply extend use.
 3 
 Proactively support children who are struggling to manage their 
use with clearly signposted access to services and technical 
solutions, for example (but not limited to);
— Health-based informatics should be used to prompt positive behaviour.
6 
— Embed disengagement strategies in a voice ‘tested and desired’ by children.
7 
— Children should be encouraged to think about self-care and downtime, 
i.e. self-soothing, good sustenance, going to bed, sleep.
8 
— IOS and Android Systems must be required to give systems access 
to services (e.g. Apps) that help tackle compulsive use to enable them 
to be integrated into a child’s user experience. 
The above lists are non-exhaustive, there are as many solutions as there 
are strategies and it requires culture change, technological change and 
a commitment to change — that puts the ‘best interests’ of children first.
9 
Which is why we also recommend;

07
Executive summary 
 4 
Develop and undertake Childhood Impact Assessments on:
— Existing services and products.
— Future services and products before roll out — in particular noting the ethical 
implications of emerging technologies and consider their impact on children.
 5 
 Work to an ethical framework built on principles of transparency, 
accountability, responsibility — in the ‘best interests’ of children 
(see Recommendation 20).
 6 
 Clearly and succinctly inform children (and parents of younger children) 
when persuasive design features are being used, and outline possible 
impacts, including sleep deprivation, loss of concentration, educational 
outcomes and impact on emotional state and behaviour.
 7 
 Provide online services and products that prioritise children’s 
‘best interests’ over commercial considerations — don’t simply 
lock them out.
 8 
 Listen to the demands of children who are asking for more control, 
fairer treatment and more peace.
We call on parents to
 9 
 Talk with children about the value of independence and how persuasive 
design strategies undermine autonomy.
10 
 Help children disable persuasive design features that can currently 
be switched off. 
11 
Agree boundaries based on activity and intentional use, not time limits. 
12 
Support the introduction of Recommendation 2 by: 
— Using services that proactively design their services with children in mind.
— Not using services that continue to design their services to be compulsive 
for children.
Put your own phones down.

08
Executive summary 
We call on Government to
14 
 Define compulsive use as an internet harm for children, and 
to provide advice, information and adjust policy accordingly. 
15 
 Require industry to characterise, name, label and grade 
the impact of the persuasive design features they are using, 
in order that children can make effective choices about 
digital use. 
16 
 Publish a ‘fair game’ charter that sets out an ethically child- 
centric set of standards for games and gaming. Setting out 
ethical rules against behavioural mechanics that try to draw 
children into addictive behaviours or exhortations.
10 
17 
 Undertake a public health campaign that explains the dangers 
of compulsive design strategies and their effects on children, 
as they move from primary to secondary education. Aimed at 
Year 6 children and those that care for and teach them, to counteract 
the 'cliff edge’ explosion of usage identified by the Children’s 
Commissioner for England.
11 
18 
 Support digital literacy as part of the curriculum to equip children 
to help them navigate the digital world and understand how they 
are being influenced, and mandate that computer studies and PSHE 
in schools, and Computer Science Degree courses include modules 
that explore ethical design, including issues of data harvesting 
and impact of persuasive design strategies.
19 
 Ensure frontline professionals (for example, teachers, social 
workers, health and legal professionals) have appropriate training, 
and a broad understanding of the full range of opportunities and risks 
in the digital environment, including compulsive use. Include training 
as part of degree accreditation and professional standards. 
20 
 Publish an ethical framework to govern all digital interactions 
with children and young people, based on principles of transparency, 
accountability and responsibility — in the ‘best interests’ of 
children. In doing so, consider the legality, ethics and safety 
of creating digital habits in childhood. 
21 
 Support the new Age-Appropriate Design Code by providing 
sufficient resources for the regulator (ICO) to ensure that the 
Code is fully applied and enforced. 

09
Executive summary 
22 
 Create an independent, overarching centre of excellence, 
research and policy for all interventions relating to children 
in the digital environment. It should have powers and resources 
to compel attendance and demand accountability, and be 
a voice for children in all areas of Government including 
health, justice, education, home affairs and digital.
23 
 Actively work to implement a global framework that sets the ethical, 
governance and legal boundaries for the technology sector. 
And finally...
24 
 We call on institutional and individual shareholders to follow 
the action of Apple Investors, JANA Partners LLC and the 
California State Teachers’ Retirement System, and demand 
that companies you invest in design devices, services and 
products that accommodate the needs and rights of childhood.
12 

10
Foreword
The internet is an extraordinary force for good but it was 
not designed with children in mind. Despite this, it is now 
part of every aspect of children’s lives — used to socialise, 
play, create and learn. 
Given this huge generational social change, 
it is everyone’s responsibility to ensure that 
this interaction is positive and healthy rather 
than negative, destructive or dehumanising. 
This responsibility lies with parents, teachers, 
Government and importantly, technology 
companies themselves. 
While progress has been made on issues such 
as parental control features, age verification 
and promises of improving digital education 
(although we still await the details including 
available funding) the fact remains that children 
are still nowhere near suitably equipped with 
the skills they need to navigate their way online.
Over the last two years, I have worked 
with a group of technology, legal and policy 
experts — including the authors of this report 
— to tackle these problems. I have called for 
three interventions from Government: the 
creation of a digital citizenship programme, to 
be compulsory in every school; implementation 
of the intent of the General Data Protection 
Regulation, by introducing simplified Terms 
and Conditions for digital services offered 
to children; and a new Children’s Digital 
Ombudsman to mediate between under 
18s and social media companies.
While I am pleased to see that progress has 
been made around digital education and the 
implementation of the GDPR, an innovative 
and bold new approach is needed if we 
are going to help children develop a healthy 
relationship with their smartphones, tablets 
and laptops, and rebalance the playing field 
between them and the internet giants. 
Offline, adults, especially parents, must aim 
not just to ‘educate’ children as they grow 
up, but to help them develop resilience and 
the ability to interact critically with the world. 
Without this, children fail to develop as agents 
of their own lives. We now have to recognise 
that for today’s children, the online and offline 
worlds have all but merged, and we must equip 
them to negotiate both, with equal knowledge, 
preparation, confidence and skill. 
I welcome this new addition to the growing 
literature about this issue and applaud 
the great contribution 5Rights makes in 
articulating the rights and needs of children 
in the digital environment. In publishing 
the Disrupted Childhood Report, it continues 
to lead the way.
Anne Longfield 
Children’s Commissioner 
for England

11
In the UK
Introduction
The demand to create a better digital environment 
for young people is often synonymous with a call 
to curtail access. 5Rights Foundation does not 
support this view. 
Children and young people consider access 
to the digital environment as both desirable 
and essential. The ability for digital technologies 
to offer prosperity, communality and social 
benefit must be celebrated. 5Rights believes 
that the rapid growth of the digital environment 
must be on terms that meet the needs of 
children and young people and that every child 
should be able to access the digital world 
creatively, knowledgeably and fearlessly. 
86% of three to four-year-olds have 
access to a tablet 
83% of 12 to 15-year-olds 
own a smartphone
64% of children aged 12 to 15-years-old 
own three or more devices
14
It is hard to overestimate the importance 
of digital devices in a child’s life. Since the 
introduction of smartphones and tablets in 
the mid to late 2000s,
13 the speed of adoption 
has been rapid and personal devices have 
become ubiquitous. 
In 1965, Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, 
predicted that the memory capacity of devices 
would double every year as the chip size 
simultaneously shrank (Moore’s Law). While 
processing power has increased, devices have 
become cheaper and more available. A child 
with a smartphone now has processing power 
more than one thousand times greater than 
that of Apollo 11 in their pocket.
15
Whilst the pace of technological change has run 
far ahead of public understanding, for children 
the digital environment is not an optional extra. 
Devices are used to study and learn, share 
opinions and interests, make arrangements 
and consume entertainment and news. 
They are also used as a gateway for creativity 
and building relationships. Children are 
growing up in a rapidly changing society 
where smart toys, smart cars, smart 
homes, smart cities (cashless and cordless) 
are increasingly the norm.
Concerned debate accompanies each 
technological invention. Digital technologies, 
unlike previous inventions, not only enhance 
real world existence, but offer parallel 
alternatives. Infinitely portable and powerfully 
designed alternative and augmented realities 
are on offer 24/7. The impact of this persistent 
interactivity, fuelled by a gold-rush for children’s 
attention, has yet to fully penetrate public 
consciousness: it demands concerned debate 
and urgent change.
This report seeks to help policy makers, parents 
and children understand how persuasive design 
works, its impact on children’s health and 
wellbeing and how it might be addressed.
5Rights exists to ensure that children’s rights 
are upheld in the digital environment. The 
Fourth Right is The Right to Informed and 
Conscious Use. It is the right for young 
people to engage with the digital environment 
intentionally, free from deliberately orchestrated 
pressure to extend use. 
At 5Rights we work closely with children 
and young people. This report reflects their 
experiences and captures their voices.
“All I want to do is disconnect from my phone 
for a long period of time, perhaps weeks, but 
there are always pressures preventing me. 
I love the way the internet allows for lots of 
new opportunities, yet it prevents me from 
doing a lot of things.”
16 Aged 17

“Scrolling forever gives me a sick 
feeling in my stomach. I’m so aware of 
how little control I have and the feeling 
of needing to be online and always 
consuming.” — Aged 18
12
 1
Chapter 
Children are struggling 
to put down their devices
The preoccupation of young people with their 
phones is a new norm. It is visible in public 
spaces, the subject of media headlines and 
increasingly a cause of familial conflict.
18 In this 
chapter we look at the attitudes to time spent 
online.
1.1 Children 
Children are inherently optimistic about the 
opportunities that the digital environment 
offers and believe that it adds significant value 
to their lives.
19 There are, however, multiple 
indications that their digital interactions can 
feel overwhelming or do not offer a meaningful 
way to connect to others.
“When you’re not on your phone or social 
media you feel as if you don’t know what’s 
happening. Also, because of social media, 
people now struggle to function in a social 
area when you can’t use your phone.” 
Aged 16
Internet Matters (2015) revealed that 40% 
of secondary school-aged children and 34% 
of primary school-aged children ‘feel worried 
that they are addicted to the internet’.
20 
Often children display absolute devotion to their 
devices, on the one hand saying they ‘could 
not do without their mobile phone for a day’,
21 
that they are ‘best friends’ with their phone
22 
or don’t feel ‘right without it’.
23 At the same 
time, they report being ‘addicted’, ‘attached’, 
‘distracted’, ‘obliged’, ‘always consuming’, 
having ‘no control’ and feeling ‘panicked’.
24
A Guardian newspaper study (2016) found that 
teenagers aged between 13 and 18-years-old 
experienced anxiety when asked to detox 
from social media. The participants said they 
‘hated not knowing what was going on’, reported 
‘reaching for their phones in the middle of the 
night before realising what they were doing’ 
and said they ‘couldn’t unwind’ without 
social media.
25 
“The technologies we use have turned into compulsions, 
if not full-fledged addictions. It’s the impulse to check 
a message notification. It’s the pull to visit YouTube, 
Facebook or Twitter for just a few minutes, only to 
find yourself still tapping and scrolling an hour later. 
It’s the urge you likely feel throughout your day but hardly 
notice… The products and services we use habitually 
alter our everyday behaviour, just as their designers 
intended. Our actions have been engineered.”
17 
Nir Eyal, author, Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products

“ Tech companies don’t seem to think 
about how hard they are making 
parents’ lives.” — A parent
34 of a five 
and nine-year-old
13
In the UK
• 40% of parents of children aged eight 
to 15-years-old worry their child spends 
too much time gaming.
35
• One third of parents of children 
aged five to 15-years-old and 40% 
of parents of children aged between 
12 to 15-years-old struggle to control 
their child’s ‘screen time’.
36
Chapter One 
Children are struggling 
to put down their devices
In the same year, Common Sense Media 
found that one third of American children aged 
between 12 and 18-years-old struggled to cut 
down time spent on devices; half said they felt 
‘addicted to their mobile devices’.
26
The tension between being governed by 
and devoted to their device is, in part, 
a result of the persuasive strategies baked 
into the digital services that children use.
1.2 Parents and carers
Parents are often told that their children are 
‘digital natives’,
27 which implies that children are 
in control. In reality, research consistently shows 
young people do not climb far up the digital 
‘ladder of opportunities’,
28 but instead spend 
most of their time on a handful of platforms, 
predominantly social media-based.
29
Meanwhile, headlines scream about bullying, 
sexual content and grooming,
30 to which the 
policy response is to teach children to be 
resilient.
31
This suggests that children are able to make 
effective decisions regarding their own safety 
and wellbeing, in an environment over which 
they have little control and which has not been 
designed to meet their needs or serve their 
best interests.
Parents are also told that their child’s life 
prospects are dependent on technology and that 
only those competent and confident with digital 
technologies will survive the radical changes in 
the job market. Last year, professional services 
firm PwC predicted that around 30% of jobs in 
the UK are potentially at high risk of automation 
by the early 2030s.
32 The World Economic 
Forum advises equipping children and students 
with skills to harness the power of technology, 
to ensure that current and future generations are 
not ‘left behind in the global digital skills race’.
33
These mixed messages — that children are 
simultaneously in charge, that they are unsafe 
and that they must have digital skills — leave 
many parents confused. Neither separately nor 
together, do they account for the full range of 
opportunities on offer, nor the difficulties that 
the digital environment presents for children, 
among them the impact of persuasive design.
“We set boundaries and when he is at 
home we can enforce them — not easily 
but eventually. When he is out of our 
sight it is a whole other issue and I resent 
having to ‘police’ him all the time. That isn’t 
the sort of trusting parent I want to be.”  
Parent of a 12-year-old
While trying to manage their children’s use, 
parents struggle with their own digital use. 
Web-based research platform Dscout found 
that the average adult smartphone user 
touched their device 2,617 times each day.
37

“ Digital technology brings benefits, 
but it’s being used in the wrong way.” 
— Secondary School Teacher
39
14
The Canadian Paediatric Society (2017) 
concluded that parents found that ‘shifting 
attention between screens and family life 
[is] stressful, tiring and reduces their ability 
to interact ‘in the moment’ with children’.
38 
“Parents are so hypocritical about young 
people online — often we are told that 
we spend too much time on our phones, 
just to watch them do the same.” 
Aged 17
“Sometimes [there are arguments] between 
my husband and me, sometimes between 
us and the children. It’s usually because 
someone is on a device when someone 
else wants to talk to them or it’s dinner 
time or some other family situation where 
the tech is getting in the way.” 
Parent of an 11 and 16-year-old
1.3 Teachers
Teachers are vocal about their pupils’ 
compulsive use of devices. During a session 
at education technology show Bett 2018,
40 led 
by Lord Knight, chief education adviser at TES 
Global, more than three quarters of the teacherpacked audience voted to ban smartphones 
in the classroom, reflecting their frustration at 
trying to teach children who are surreptitiously 
using their smartphones. 
While education policies tend to embrace digital 
delivery, there is no overarching policy about 
the use of devices in educational settings. This 
means that it is up to individual head teachers 
to determine school rules and to class teachers 
to police them,
41 setting up a frontline battle of 
attrition with technology designed to distract. 
The Association of Teachers and Lecturers 
(2016) reported: “Children are coming to school 
with poor speech and significantly reduced 
language skills. They have poor social skills 
and their motor skills are underdeveloped. 
Schools are having to address this which 
seems to be a knock-on effect of too much 
screen time at home!”
42
“I find they [devices] are a huge distraction 
and students rely on them too much and don’t 
engage with the teacher on the same level.”
43 
Post-primary school teacher
A longitudinal study co-led by Harvard 
Medical School, the University of Alberta and 
Boston Children’s Hospital in 2016 found that 
students’ ability to focus on educational tasks 
has decreased.
44 In the same study, a teacher 
observed:“I see youth who used to go outside 
at lunch break and engage in physical activity 
and socialisation. Today, many of our students 
sit all lunch hour and play on their personal 
devices.”
45 
What children, parents and teachers are 
experiencing is not the result of intentional 
use, but the consequence of deliberate 
design strategies that train device users to 
remain engaged and interactive, at any cost. 
Deployed singly and in consort these 
aspects of design are collectively 
known as persuasive design strategies.
Chapter One 
Children are struggling 
to put down their devices

“ The thought process that went into 
building these applications, Facebook 
being the first of them… was all about: 
‘How do we consume as much of 
your time and conscious attention 
as possible?’ God only knows what 
it’s doing to our children’s brains.”
46 
— Sean Parker, co-founder, Facebook
15
 2
Chapter 
The commercial imperative
Many aspects of the digital environment 
that were conceived as free and open are 
increasingly privately-owned and tightly 
controlled. Services that look free, especially 
to children, are predicated on a service contract 
paid for with the currency of personal data. 
The value of this data and the lengths to 
which the digital environment is designed 
to gather it are opaque to most users, 
and nearly all children. 
2.1 The ‘attention economy’
The Washington Post (2016) revealed the 98 data 
points that Facebook used to profile its users that 
it offered to advertisers. The data points included 
information on whether a user was expecting 
a baby, the type of car they drove, their political 
affiliations, religious beliefs, net worth and the 
number of credit lines they had.
47 
Research by Cambridge University’s 
Psychometrics Centre in collaboration with 
Microsoft Research Centre (2013), found 
that with nothing more than the Like button, 
a user’s sexuality (88% and 75% accuracy 
for men and women respectively), drug use 
(65% accuracy), parental relationship status 
(60% accuracy), ethnicity (95% accuracy) and 
political views (85% accuracy) were revealed.
48 
Many users, particularly children, have limited 
understanding of how much information 
they are revealing.
Data gathered from multiple digital activities 
provides a profile of the user that can be used 
to ascertain or predict social and market trends. 
It may be used as part of a big data set that 
helps data analysts and computer scientists 
(including medical) to understand patterns of 
behaviours and outcomes or to gauge whether 
an individual has the appropriate attributes 
and skills for a job vacancy or a place in 
an educational establishment. Such data 
may be used for direct marketing purposes 
or to calculate an individual’s social status 
or financial assets. 
In recent months, concerns have also been raised 
about the extent to which personal data has 
been used for profiling purposes during political 
campaigns and how surveillance data gathered 
by government agencies may have been sold or 
shared with artificial intelligence developers,
49 
whose purposes and impacts are not yet known. 
The current generation of children are the first 
to have data collected about them at every 
stage of their life. Professor Deborah Lupton 
and Dr. Ben Williamson in The Datafied 
Child (2017) point out that many parents start 
constructing a digital profile before their child 
is even born.
50 81% of children have a digital 
footprint before they are two years old.
51
Digital technologies can be put to an infinite number of 
tasks and uses, but the last decade has seen the digital 
environment become increasingly commercialised. 

“ It makes me angry that businesses 
use specific designs to keep young 
people on their app/website. They 
are exploiting unknowing, young 
people so that they are able to build 
up ad revenue.”— Aged 17
16
Chapter Two 
The commercial imperative
This runs counter to social norms offline 
where it is understood that children 
have a right to privacy, and that the 
vulnerabilities associated with childhood 
make it inappropriate to profile children.
Data is cheap to collect and can be easily 
shared. Those who control data repeatedly 
extract value at minimal cost, resulting in 
high-value companies with lower costs than 
traditional industries. The Big Five — Apple, 
Amazon, Alphabet, Facebook and Microsoft 
— or Seven, if you include Chinese giants 
Alibaba and Tencent, control the bulk of devices 
and services in the data collection value chain; 
they are also among the most valuable 
companies in the world.
52
Central to this value chain are persuasive 
design strategies that entice and keep the 
user online in order to create more data.
2.2 Persuasive design 
“ Never before in history have such a small 
number of designers… had such a large 
influence on two billion [now three billion] 
people’s thoughts and choices.”
53  
Tristan Harris, ex-Google Ethicist, founder 
of the Centre for Humane Technology
Persuasive design, a term coined by 
psychologist BJ Fogg, combines the theory 
of behavioural design with computer technology. 
Behavioural design uses a system of rewards 
and punishments to determine human behaviour 
patterns. Both persuasive and behavioural 
designs can be used to increase wellbeing 
for personal and social good. However, it is 
arguably more often used to manipulate 
human behaviour so that users subconsciously 
act in the commercial interests of others. 
What is characterised as a struggle for attention 
is, in fact, deliberately orchestrated, engineered 
and designed. Persuasive design strategies 
are deployed for commercial purposes to keep 
users online. 
“You lose precious time with your friends 
and family that you cannot get back.” 
Aged 13
It is not reasonable to design services to 
be compulsive and then reprimand children 
for being preoccupied with their phones.

17
A brief history of 
behavioural design
At the beginning of the 20th Century, Russian 
physiologist Professor Ivan Pavlov discovered 
how to get dogs to produce an instinctive 
salivating response to a stimulus that bore no 
relationship to food. Having observed that dogs 
naturally salivate in anticipation of food, Pavlov 
experimented by ringing a bell whenever he fed 
the dogs. He then stopped bringing food and 
only rang the bell. The dogs, ‘conditioned’ to 
associate the ringing with food, continued to 
salivate at the sound of the bell. This is known 
as classical conditioning.
In the 1940s, psychologists BF Skinner 
and Charles Ferster built on Pavlov’s work 
introducing ‘schedules of reinforcement’ 
whilst experimenting with pigeons. They 
found they could teach the pigeons that 
their behaviour had consequences. This form 
of reinforcement, ‘operant conditioning’, 
requires the deployment of both reward 
and punishments to be effective. 
Classical and operant conditioning are 
acknowledged as having strengths and 
weaknesses, but others have gone on 
to build on the key insight that human 
and animal behaviour can be conditioned 
(trained) to change.
In the 1990s, neuroscientist Wolfram Schultz 
demonstrated that once the brain receives 
a cue or trigger to behave in a way that is 
rewarded, it will automatically seek out further 
rewards. His findings implied that the human 
brain could be trained to repeat ‘reward seeking’ 
actions. Schultz concluded that the use of 
reward signals was so powerful that they 
constrained ‘free will’ to act.
In the late 1990s, Professor BJ Fogg set 
up the Persuasive Design Lab and soon 
after published Persuasive Technology: 
Using Computers to Change What We 
Think and Do.
54 By 2009, he had developed 
The Fogg Behavior Model, combining 
advances in technology with behavioural 
science. The Behavior Model enabled 
computer scientists to build software 
that reward or punish certain behaviours 
in order to elicit desired changes 
in behaviour.
55 
Whilst Fogg’s Persuasive Design Lab 
was set up with the intention of combining 
technology and behavioural science for 
social good (for example by developing 
programmes that use persuasive design 
to help people stop smoking or resolve 
conflict), the Lab became a ‘hothouse’ 
for Silicon Valley. Alumni include Mike 
Krieger, co-founder of Instagram; Tristan 
Harris, ex-design ethicist at Google; 
and Ed Baker, head of growth at both 
Facebook and Uber, among others.
56 
Fogg’s is not the only theory of behavioural 
design; another notable example is Professors 
Richard H Thaler and Cass R Sunstein’s 
Nudge Theory. Their model uses ‘choice 
architecture’ to ask questions in a way that 
nudges individuals’ behaviour ‘in beneficial 
directions without restricting freedom of 
choice’.
57 The Nudge Theory found favour 
with Britain’s former Prime Minister David 
Cameron who set up The Behavioural 
Insights Team within the Cabinet Office 
in July 2010 to ‘enable people to make 
better choices for themselves’.
58 
Separately and together these theories 
build on the proven concept that 
human behaviour can be manipulated 
by priming and conditioning, i.e. by 
manipulating human instincts using 
rewards and punishments.
Chapter Two 
The commercial imperative

Name Previously used names Address Address history Longitude 
and latitude Phone numbers Email address Age Height Weight Gender Race & ethnicity Country of origin Religion (by surname 
at the household level) Languages Family ties Demographic characteristics of family members Surnames in household 
Single parent with children Ethnic and religious affiliations Friend connections Level of usage Heavy Facebook user Heavy 
Twitter user Twitter user with 250+ friends Is a member of over 5 social networks Online influence Type of media posted 
Uploaded pictures Use of long distance calling services Presence of computer owner Use of mobile devices Social media and 
internet accounts Demographic and business data Number of baths Number of rooms Number of units Presence of fireplace 
Presence of garage Presence of home pool Apparel preferences Attendance at sporting events Charitable giving 
Participation in sweepstakes or contests Pets Dog owner Political leanings Reading and listening preferences Santa fe/ 
native american lifestyle New age/organic lifestyle Is a member of over 5 shopping sites Media channel usage — daytime tv 
Bible lifestyle Leans left Ability to afford Credit card user Read books or magazines about travel Amount spent on 
goods Buying activity Method of payment Military memorabilia/weaponry Retail purchases — most frequent category 
Mail order responder — insurance Dollars — apparel — women’s plus sizes Dollars — apparel — men’s big & tall Books — 
mind & body/self-help Propensity to order prescriptions by mail Smoker in household Use of corrective lenses or contacts 
Allergy sufferer Magazines — health Weight loss & supplements Purchase history or reported interest in health topics 
including: allergies, arthritis, medicine preferences, cholesterol, diabetes, dieting, body shaping, alternative medicine, beauty/ 
physical enhancement, disabilities, homeopathic remedies, organic focus, orthopaedics and senior needs Social security 
number Driver’s license number Birth date Birth dates of each child in household Birth date of family members in household 
Education level Grandparent in house Spanish speaker Foreign language household (e.g. Russian, Hindi, Tagalog, Cantonese) 
Internet connection type Internet provider Dwelling type Home size Listing price Media channels used Political conservative 
Political liberal Activism & social issues Cruises booked Preferred vacation destination Preferred airline Marital status 
Presence of elderly parent Presence of children in household Occupation Veteran in household Households with a 
householder who is hispanic origin or latino Employed — white collar occupation Employed — blue collar occupation Work 
at home Flag Length of residence Household size Congressional district Bankruptcies Criminal offenses and convictions 
Judgments Liens Marriage licenses State licenses and registrations Voting registration and party identification Electronics 
purchases Operating system Software purchases Census tract data Address coded as public/government housing Heating 
and cooling Home equity Home loan amount and interest rate Lender type Length of residence Market value Move date 
Rent price Type of owner Type of roof Year built Gambling — casinos Gambling — state lotteries Thrifty elders Life events (e.g. 
retirement, newlywed, expectant parent) Magazine and catalogue subscriptions Participation in outdoor activities (e.g. golf, 
motorcycling, skiing, camping) Assimilation code Preferred celebrities Preferred movie genres Preferred music genres Donor 
(e.g. religious, political, health causes) Financial newsletter subscriber Upscale retail card holder Affluent baby boomer Working-
class moms Working woman African american professional Membership clubs — self-help Membership clubs — wines 
Exercise — sporty living Winter activity enthusiast Participant — motorcycling Outdoor/hunting & shooting Biker/hell’s 
angels Presence of gold or platinum card Credit worthiness Recent mortgage borrower Credit worthiness Recent mortgage 
borrower Pennywise mortgagee Financially challenged Owns stocks or bonds Investment interests Discretionary income 
level Credit active Credit relationship with financial or loan company Credit relationship with low-end standalone department 
store Number of investment Properties owned Estimated income Life insurance Loans Net worth indicator Underbanked indicator 
Tax return transcripts Type of credit cards Brand preferences Insurance renewal Make & model Vehicles owned Vehicle 
identification numbers Vehicle value index Propensity to purchase a new or used vehicle Propensity to purchase a particular 
vehicle type (e.g. SUV, Coupe, Sedan) Motor cycle owner (e.g. Harley, off-road trail bike) Motor cycle purchased 0-6 months ago 
Boat owner Purchase date Purchase information Intend to purchase — vehicle Travel purchase — highest price paid Date of 
last travel purchase Air services — frequent flyer Vacation property Vacation type (e.g. casino, time share, cruises, RV) Number 
of orders Buying channel preference (e.g. internet, mail, phone) Types of purchases Shooting games Guns and ammunition 
Christian religious products Jewish holidays/judaica gifts Kwanzaa/African-Americana gifts Type of entertainment purchased 
Type of food purchased Average days between orders Last online order date Last offline order date Online orders $500-$999.99 
18
If it’s free, how do 
they make money?
By collecting and selling your data. 
The US Federal Trade Commission lists 
the following data as routinely gathered.
Chapter Two 
The commercial imperative

“ Our ability to live the lives 
we want to live… through 
technology is a design 
problem, not just a personal 
responsibility problem”
62 
— Tristan Harris
19
2.3 The zero-sum game 
for our attention
“The power to design user behavior ought to 
come with a standard of ethical limitations.”
59 
Nir Eyal 
This year, former Google design ethicist 
Tristan Harris launched the Center for Humane 
Technology, which describes the challenge 
of persuasive design in the following terms:
There’s an invisible problem that’s 
affecting all of society…
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Google 
have produced amazing products that have 
benefited the world enormously. But these 
companies are also caught in a zero-sum 
race for our finite attention, which they 
need to make money. Constantly forced 
to outperform their competitors, they must 
use increasingly persuasive techniques 
to keep us glued. 
They point AI-driven news feeds, content 
and notifications at our minds, continually 
learning how to hook us more deeply 
— from our own behaviour.
Unfortunately, what’s best for capturing 
our attention isn’t best for our wellbeing:
• Snapchat turns conversations into 
streaks, redefining how our children 
measure friendship.
• Instagram glorifies the picture-perfect 
life, eroding our self-worth.
• Facebook segregates us into echo 
chambers, fragmenting our communities.
• YouTube autoplays the next perfect 
video, even if it eats into our sleep.
These are not neutral products. They are 
part of a system designed to addict us.
60 
The commercial imperative of Big Tech to 
design compulsive use into digital products 
and services conflicts with the needs 
and rights of children.
61 
In considering how to fulfil those needs and 
rights, we must first understand persuasive 
design strategies. 
“I worry… that he seems to be overwhelmed 
with so many messages and constant 
communication from his friends. The alerts 
go off constantly. I couldn’t cope as an adult, 
it is overwhelming for children.” 
Parent of a 12-year-old 
“Even though social media can be great, 
it can be like a contagious disease where 
people can’t stop looking at their phones 
and spreads the word of ‘oh you need to 
look at this’.” Aged 12
Chapter Two 
The commercial imperative

“ The short-term, dopamine-driven 
feedback loops that we have created 
are destroying how society works… 
No civil discourse, no cooperation, 
misinformation, mistruth.”
63 
— Chamath Palihapitiya, former 
vice-president of User Growth, Facebook
20
 3
Chapter 
Strategies that keep 
users online 
Persuasive design strategies and techniques may be 
used singly or in concert but they all follow Professor 
Fogg’s understanding that human instincts can be 
accelerated, nudged and determined by technology 
that, in turn, changes or trains human behaviour. 
In this chapter we explain the power 
of some of the most commonly used 
persuasive design strategies.
3.1 The rush (dopamine)
Human beings respond to the promise of 
a reward by releasing a chemical in the brain 
known as dopamine.
64 In some settings the 
reward is obvious; for example, an affirmation, 
such as a Like, from another user. Others are 
less understood; for example, typing bubbles 
or a read receipt. The anticipation triggers 
a small release of dopamine, which technology 
theorist Dr. Michael Chorust has described 
as the brain’s “reward-seeking drug”.
65 Once 
the reward has been absorbed, the dopamine 
fades leaving the desire for more. 
Children’s predilection to seek immediate 
gratification makes them particularly susceptible 
to habit-forming rewards.
66
This makes it difficult for them to ignore the 
prospect of a dopamine reward, even when 
this conflicts with other essential daily activities, 
such as sleeping or eating.
67 
Variable rewards hold a special thrill, as the 
user anticipates a reward that they know 
could come but is tantalisingly just out of 
reach. A gambler waiting to see where the 
roulette wheel will stop or a viewer watching 
a presenter’s dramatic pause before they 
announce a winner. In both cases, the 
individuals experience a dopamine rush 
as they anticipate the unknown outcome. 
Professor Adam Alter explains:“...it’s not 
guaranteed that you’re going to get Likes 
on your posts. And it’s the unpredictability 
of that process that makes it so addictive. 
If you knew that every time you posted 
something you’d get 100 Likes, it would 
become boring really fast.” 
68
Online services are littered with these 
apparently benign reward features.

Case study
Angry 
Birds
“You feel the need to use social 
media all the time in order to be 
social or popular.” — Aged 14
21
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online
Angry Birds is just one example of thousands 
of games that use reward loops to make playing 
compulsive. What is less apparent is that the 
same persuasive strategies are woven into 
most other digital services, such as social 
media, shopping, news, education or even 
entertainment. 
They prime users to repeat behaviours; as the 
loop becomes ingrained so the action becomes 
a habit. Neuroscientist Norman Doidge explains 
that the brain is not static but that conditioning 
(repeated activities) alters it. 
The ability for the brain to change is called 
‘neuroplasticity’;
72 this makes it more capable 
of adapting to a changing environment, but 
also more vulnerable to outside influencers.
73 
A user’s device is the means to access rewards; 
an equally integral part of the loop. Users 
habitually touch their pocket, bag or phone to 
check for their smartphone and then reactivate 
it in order to generate new rewards.
Dr. Chorust describes the game Angry 
Birds as “a terrific manipulator of the brain’s 
dopamine system”.
69 The game involves 
firing cartoon birds from a slingshot to knock 
down precariously built towers. Launched 
in 2009, it has since been downloaded 
more than 3.7 billion times.
70 
“The dopamine action in your brain makes 
you want to know, urgently, what will happen 
when you fire the bird. And it’s extremely 
easy to get yourself in a position of wanting, 
because the game is so simple. It gives you 
intermittent but extremely satisfying rewards. 
So you pull the slingshot again and again 
and again. And again and again and again 
and AGAIN.”
71 
3.2 Popularity contest
Human beings are social beings. Our identity 
is defined by and measured against other group 
members. Persuasive design strategies exploit 
the natural human desire to be social and 
popular, by taking advantage of an individual’s 
fear of not being social and popular in order 
to extend their online use. For young people, 
identity requires constant attention, curation 
and renewal. At key development stages it can 
be overwhelmingly important to be accepted 
by your peer group.
74 
Quantifying friends, Likes, retweets or 
followers creates a public metric of personal 
value. At a glance, one user can see how 
many connections or responses another is 
getting and measure themselves against that. 
Posts ranked by popularity in a newsfeed are 
given pride of place on the screen, algorithms 
designed to promote the already popular, help 
them travel further, while constantly building 
the statistics. Quantity not quality of interaction 
is the metric that is measured.
“Sometimes using Snapchat can feel 
like you have achieved something when 
all you receive is a number.” 
Aged 14
Fear of missing out, which even has its 
own widely used acronym ‘FoMO’, is the 
inverse of the popularity contest. Professor 
Andrew Przybylski et al describes FoMO as 
“a pervasive apprehension that others might 
be having rewarding experiences from which 
one is absent”.
75 
Those who regularly experience FoMO display 
a slavish need to stay online just in case they 
miss an opportunity for personal validation, 
or to confirm their own low status by passively 
watching others more popular than they are, 
exacerbating their experience of missing out. 
Such ‘pervasive apprehension’ is fuelled by 
automated and targeted messages pointing 
to the activity of other users in an individual’s 
network (and the network of their network) 
revealing a vast swathe of activity from which 
they, the non-active user, is excluded. 

“Companies target your paranoia to 
make you feel you’re missing out and 
that if you’re not online something 
drastic concerning you may happen.” 
— Aged 16
22
Those with FoMO use social media much more 
compulsively, including checking social media 
accounts as soon as they wake up, during meal 
times and last thing at night.
76 
The need to quantify relationships, and the 
associated pressure to not miss something, 
compels a child to enter a cycle in which 
they act and share continuously, thereby 
extending their time online.
3.3 Summonses: buzzes, pings, 
vibrations and the colour red
“When I walk around and see people staring 
at their phones often it’s because they’ve 
taken out their phones to look at Facebook 
notifications, that’s something I feel is not 
going in the right direction for society.”
77 
Justin Rosenstein, co-designer of the 
Like button
Human beings respond to noises, movements 
and light. It is a necessity borne from our 
hunter-gatherer forebears who needed to 
be alert to the presence of predators or other 
dangers.
78 Summonsing is one of the most 
powerful strategies of persuasive design.
Summons come in many forms. It might be 
a pop up or a locked screen message; short, 
long or insistent vibrations; surges of light or 
sharp sounds or a personalised call. All are 
designed to create a sense of urgency, which 
acts as a powerful summons. Often the only 
way to stop the influx of notifications is to 
comply with the call for attention. 
“You can feel weak emotionally and 
vulnerable after spending too much use.” 
Aged 16
“You can’t leave it because you’d be up all 
night answering the old messages and the 
new ones asking why you didn’t answer the 
first message — sometimes when I get back 
to my phone then I get LITERALLY hundreds.” 
Aged 14
Children are less able to make a hierarchy of 
demands so tend to answer the newest first 
instilling a habit of responding to ‘the new’.
79  
This has profound implications since routines 
and habits formed before the age of nine are 
unlikely to change.
80 
In 2017, Ofcom reported that 53% of three 
to four-year-olds were online, a statistic 
that rose to 79% of five to seven year-olds 
and 94% of eight to 11- year-olds.
81 
Habit-forming summons are further enhanced 
by machine learning and artificial intelligence 
systems
82 which are able to learn when a user 
is most likely to respond, so send notifications 
at an ‘optimal time’.
83 Leanplum, a mobile 
marketing platform, recommends services 
push messages between 8pm and 10pm to 
get the most impact.
84 Re-engagement with 
gaming apps following push notifications peaks 
between 11am and 1pm, while social media 
peaks at 10am and then again at 11pm.
85
Whilst some settings can be switched off, 
this action almost always triggers warnings 
to users that they risk missing out on new 
content.
86 Users are then forced to weigh up 
the intrusiveness of the notifications against 
their personal FoMO. For many children, this 
represents an impossible choice.
Tristan Harris highlights the power of the small 
red circle. “Red is a trigger colour,” he explains. 
“That’s why it is used as an alarm signal.”
87 
The small red circle that appears on apps, 
messages and updates, implies urgency and 
encourages the user to respond by checking, 
thereby re-engaging with the service. 
The persuasive strategy of constant 
summons creates an exhausting level 
of demand that exploits a child’s human 
instinct to respond.
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online

“ Using technology often makes me feel 
like I could be missing out on time 
actually with my friends.” — Aged 15
23
4 
 Slowing progress  
These barriers force a user to do or 
consume ‘something’ before they can 
access the information they are seeking. 
They might take the form of sponsored 
ads above searches, videos that break 
up news articles or shopping sites that 
prevent precision searches. Each barrier 
is small, but as the user swipes, removes 
and negotiates the barriers, their time 
online is extended before getting to what 
they initially sought. Anthony Wagner, 
associate Professor of Psychology at 
Stanford University, explained: “Where 
there are multiple sources of information... 
[users] are not able to filter out what’s not 
relevant to their current goal. That failure 
to filter means they’re slowed down by 
irrelevant information.”
89 
5 
 Pace of play  
Users are more likely to stop if the pace 
becomes predictable. Games partition 
progress into levels and change the pace 
and intensity of play, to offer the prospect of 
resolution while obscuring the fact that the 
game is designed to be played indefinitely, 
or at least as long as possible. Varying pace 
of play is not restricted to games. On social 
media, users can be ‘swiftly dragged into a 
high speed retrospective of the last 24 hours 
in the life of someone they may or may not 
know’
90 before introducing a slower pace 
as they scroll through endless feeds whilst 
notifications offer pacy interjections. 
6 
 No save  
Some games prevent users from saving 
progress until they reach a predetermined 
point. If they break away before this point, 
all previous progress is lost. So, players 
play on. 
Each of these design features creates 
a pull towards extended use.
The ubiquity of these strategies results 
in a very real sense of having ‘lost time’ 
doing you are not quite sure what.
3.4 Losing time
“I have two kids now and I regret every minute 
that I’m not paying attention to them because 
my smartphone has sucked me in.”
88  
Loren Brichter, designer of the 
pull-to-refresh mechanism
Routinely, the amount of time required 
or spent doing online tasks is concealed. 
The decision to continue watching, playing 
or scrolling is designed into the service.
Examples of this are ubiquitous in the digital 
environment, but among them are:
1 
 Auto play, auto suggestion 
and infinite feeds 
Each one automatically replaces the 
next piece of content or action before 
the previous one has finished, thereby 
minimising or eliminating breaks during 
which a user might decide to disengage. 
2 
 Creating a bubble 
Music or sounds are introduced to 
desensitise the user to their immediate 
real-life surroundings. These are combined 
with sharp intrusive sounds that make the 
player hyper-aware of the screen. Such 
techniques are particularly used in gaming.
3 
 Small demands 
These are invitations, such as ‘click here’, 
‘watch video’, ‘accept invitation’, ‘Like’, 
‘agree’, ‘post’ or ‘read message’. Each 
demand seems small but will frictionlessly 
lead to further demands for action.
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online

24
In a recent 5Rights workshop, we met 
a nine-year-old boy who spoke about his 
arguments with his mum and dad when 
they asked him to stop playing a particular 
game. He described screaming matches, 
missed dinners, exasperated parents 
and his own personal regret. 
This child was using a game that took three 
hours to complete, designed with no save 
function so that there was no alternative 
to the deliberately orchestrated desire to 
complete. As a result, he neglected ‘offline’ 
aspects of his life including sleep, meals 
and friends, and was at loggerheads with 
his parents. He was visibly upset. All he 
wanted was a pause or save button, but it 
was not designed into the game, in order 
to make the pull to play greater than the 
opportunity to stop.
No save button
3.5 Social obligation
“ A social validation feedback loop… 
exactly the kind of thing that a hacker 
like myself would come up with, 
because you’re exploiting a vulnerability 
in human psychology.”
91 
Sean Parker, co-founder, Facebook
Part of being a social animal is a sense of 
obligation weighted against the nature and 
depth of the social bond. Most people feel 
a greater obligation to their trusted circle of 
family and friends than to the broad network 
of people they know less well, and significantly 
more than their obligations to those at the 
furthest fringes of their community. 
By contrast, online reciprocity frequently 
extends indiscriminately to as many people 
as possible in the user’s network so that, 
in addition to intentional acts of social validation 
or communication, it can require large numbers 
of responses that do not acknowledge the 
complexity or limits of the relationships. Young 
people engaged in swiftly changing friendship 
patterns are held to old obligations, or made 
to feel guilty about moving on. This presents 
a perfect scenario for social anxiety. 
The obligations baked into services are 
presented in a manner that deliberately punish 
inaction, for example, by letting the sender 
know when the recipient has received or 
read a message or text. Knowing someone 
knows that you are online creates a heightened 
obligation to respond. Creating large quantities 
of social obligations within online relationships 
offers not only the exhausting prospect of 
constant social management, but can prevent 
the development of more nuanced and 
satisfying relationships driven by personal 
choice not numerical highs.
For children at different development 
stages, their peers represent a powerful 
mirror of status and identity. Persuasive 
design strategies that emphasise quantity 
over quality create the backdrop for social 
anxiety and issues of self-esteem.
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online

“ (There is a) pressure of losing your 
friends and ending lifelong friendships 
if you forget to send a streak one day.” 
— Aged 13
25
3.6 Emotional highs
Highly emotive content attracts and holds 
attention and increases engagement. As Jaron 
Lanier, the inventor of virtual reality, explains, 
companies hold our attention best by making 
us angry, insecure or scared: 
“The most effective situation is when users 
get into weird spirals of mob-like agreement 
or disagreement with other users.”
92 
Polarised and/or extreme content keeps users 
online as they click through to the next equally 
emotive and extreme story, creating a cycle of 
activity. ‘Clickbait’ is a term used for a title or 
heading that is deliberately written in a manner 
that entices a user to click on a link. Journalist 
Arwa Mahdawi describes YouTube as a 
“terrifying cesspit of clickbait content”, with one 
YouTuber feeding a homeless man biscuits filled 
with toothpaste and another killing her boyfriend 
in a prank gone wrong.
93 
Clickbait articles tend to disappoint, but by 
using ‘punchy’ emotions such as anger, humour 
or inspiration and by promising to satisfy users’ 
curiosity, they offer the promise of something 
rewarding. Bryan Gardiner, a lecturer in 
computer science at Ulster University, writes: 
“How many cheap emotional ploys, false 
promises and empty listicles and quizzes can 
a person endure?... research has shown that 
humans are quite willing to put up with massive 
amounts of disappointment and frustration, 
so long as there is an occasional pay-out.”
94 
A variable reward.
Whilst clickbait offers a clear example of 
extreme content it comes in many forms. 
Newspapers have followed the success of 
clickbait by introducing their own screaming 
headlines online.
True stories take six times as long to reach 
people than fake ones filled with outrageous 
claims,
95 and comment boxes are filled with 
aggressive and counter aggressive opinion. 
When two users each send the other a snap 
a day for three days in a row, they start a 
streak. The ‘goal’ is to keep the streak going 
for as long as possible. As the unbroken 
streak rises, it becomes a way of quantifying 
a friendship. It is common for children to 
maintain multiple streaks with competing 
friendships or to build streaks with children 
they don’t know well to appear popular. 
‘Streak management’ can be time-consuming 
and distracting. The user is notified each time 
they receive a snap, which acts as a prompt 
to reciprocate. The compulsion to maintain 
the streaks, coupled with the need to not let 
others down, means that it is not unusual for 
children to get friends or siblings to ‘babysit’ 
their streaks at times they are unable to 
access their phones. 
Breaking a streak is viewed as an indictment 
of a friendship. To avoid these socially 
awkward events, users are obliged to send 
multiple snaps a day irrespective of the 
quality of the relationship or the content of 
the communication. This cycle of obligation 
is deliberately designed to encourage repeat 
visits to Snapchat. 
The maintenance of children’s streaks can run 
into many hours a week. In a recent 5Rights 
workshop, children were astonished by their 
weekly total time spent on Snapchat. One 
boy discovered that he had spent 32 hours 
on the app — effectively four working days 
— during each of the previous three weeks.
Case study
Snapchat 
streaks
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online

“I’m happy as long as she is occupied… 
[but] every day [there are arguments]! 
Usually when I’m trying to get her to do 
something else like go to bed or do her 
homework.” — Parent of a 10-year-old
26
Professor John Suler discusses the ‘toxic’ online 
disinhibition effect, where people are more 
likely to share personal information or display 
more intense behaviour than they would offline, 
including rude language and harsh criticisms.
96 
Young people, particularly early teens (aged 
between 13 and 15) are characterised by 
idealism and tend towards polarised thinking 
making it more likely that they will respond 
to emotionally charged content.
97 
Professor Harry Dyer from the University 
of East Anglia explains that “the mounting 
pressure to outdo oneself and others demands 
more extreme content, until eventually — 
inevitably — a line is crossed. Whether by 
embodying beauty ideals or eliciting laughs, 
everyone in the ‘omniopticon’ [an ‘increasingly 
powerful form’ of ‘social surveillance’ where the 
many are watched by the many]
98 is scrambling 
to be at the centre of attention… people are 
pushing the limits in order to get noticed and 
this includes doing bizarre and even deadly 
things — like eating laundry detergents.”
99 
Not all extremity is hateful, bullying or violent. 
Emotional reactions also come from the cute 
and the fuzzy. 
Parents, keen to occupy their children, put on 
‘nice’ content to keep them entertained, priming 
children to expect a cycle of emotional reward 
and the desire for more. 
Case study
Sneezing pandas 
and dancing kittens 
Among the most watched and shared 
videos on YouTube are those that feature 
cute animals. In 2014, internet data 
from video marketer ReelSEO showed 
that two million cat videos were posted 
on YouTube, collectively getting more 
than 24.6 billion views.
100 
Humans are instinctively drawn to people, 
animals and even cartoon characters with 
infantile features (such as disproportionately 
big eyes, chubby cheeks and large foreheads) 
as they trigger the user’s ‘baby schema’ 
or ‘cute’ response. That is our evolutionary 
instinct to nurture and care.
101 
The baby schema response emerges early 
during development. Children as young as 
three to six-years-old are drawn to, and will 
spend longer staring at, images of animals 
that have high levels of childlike features.
102 
Triggering a child’s ‘cute’ response keeps 
children, especially very young children, 
engaged for longer. 
Cute images release dopamine, encouraging 
users to seek out further images. 
Yale psychologist Oriana Aragon says: 
“We want our cute fix.”
103
The use of cute as a reward appears as 
one of the least problematic persuasive 
strategies. But as we outline in Chapter 
Four, a key issue for children, even very 
young children, is the opportunity cost 
— what they are not doing while watching 
cat videos.
Chapter Three 
Strategies that keep users online

“ The more time you use social media 
the more addicted you are and there 
is no control over it.” — Aged 15
27
4
Chapter 
Impact of persuasive 
technologies on childhood
Access to digital technologies for life, learning, social 
and entertainment is crucially important to children 
and young people, for the development of communities 
and for the future of society as a whole. 
The digital environment is entirely man and 
woman made. Any, or all, of the persuasive 
design strategies described in Chapter Three 
could be abandoned, recalibrated or redesigned 
to meet the needs of children and young people. 
4.1 Anxiety and aggression
Encouraged by persuasive loops of reward, 
reciprocity, obligation, heightened emotion 
and automated spread of content (particularly 
highly-charged content), children and young 
people are sharing their photographs, opinions, 
personal information and vulnerabilities on 
an unprecedented scale.
104 We have explained 
how the need for validation creates a habit 
of needing more. Managing such public 
and frequent interactions creates enormous 
pressures for young people, and with it comes 
anxiety, low self-esteem and mental health 
issues
105 at ever-increasing levels.
106 
Professor Jon Elhai et al in the Journal of 
Affective Disorders (2017), is one in a long 
line of academics who link elevated levels of 
depression to excessive social media use.
107 
Stanford University’s Professor Clifford 
Nass agrees. He warns that children have 
an unrealistic world view provided by the 
overwhelmingly happy curated postings 
they see online. He argues that this leads 
to the erroneous conclusion that ‘everyone 
is happy, except me’.
108 
An excessive amount of sharing also translates 
into exaggerating, polarising and aggressive 
behaviour, fuelled by the need to get noticed. 
Ditch the Label’s Annual Bullying Survey last 
year found that 69% of respondents admitted 
to having done something abusive towards 
another person online,
109 while 35% of 
respondents had sent a screenshot of 
someone’s status or photo to laugh at them 
in a group chat.
110 Girls are disproportionately 
affected. In 2017 Plan International UK found 
that almost half of girls aged between 11 
and 18-years-old had experienced online abuse.
111 
The young contributors to The Internet on 
Our Own Terms focused on the personally 
damaging digital content which left them feeling 
‘highly vulnerable online’.
112 The participants 
recounted that other children had been bullied, 
forced to move schools, and that police had 
even become involved when a child’s private 
content had been shared more widely.
113
The culture of excessive sharing, fuelled 
by persuasive technologies, has resulted 
in an epidemic of self-doubt, anxiety, 
low self-esteem and correspondingly 
aggressive behaviour among the young.
114

28
The pressure to be popular online is 
reinforced by the social networks with their 
invasive and frequent notifications, guilt-trip 
emails and emotional account deactivation 
processes. Social media outlets are quick 
to glamorise their most popular users 
and showcase them to global audiences 
as a tool to encourage deeper content 
consumption and creation. 
In order to counteract the damage that 
social media is having on the lives of 
young people, social networks must 
be transparent about their models of 
revenue generation and algorithm changes. 
The dangerous trend of seeking external 
validation online must be counteracted 
with self-esteem training for children.
Furthermore, young people must be 
empowered to make educated decisions 
about the ways in which technology 
weaves into their lives. They should 
not be guilt-tripped into creating content 
or keeping their social media accounts 
active with automated emails and 
emotional processes.
Social media addiction 
and personality 
augmentation online 
Dr. Liam Hackett, 
Chief Executive, 
Ditch the Label
A recent Ditch the Label survey of more than 
10,000 young people aged between 12 and 
20-years-old found that 61% of respondents 
would struggle to last longer than 24 hours 
without access to their social media, with many 
suggesting that it would make them anxious, 
lonely or distressed.
115 We are increasingly a 
society of social media addicts, with young 
people being some of its biggest consumers. 
Against a backdrop of media rhetoric that tells 
us, often in the most nuanced of ways, that 
we aren’t quite good enough, many young 
people are seeking external validation online 
through the use of social media. Part of the 
appeal of social media is the ability to publish 
an augmented version of one’s reality in an 
attempt to be the person with the most Likes 
or the most followers.
Increasing amounts of young people are using 
social media versions of reality as benchmarks 
against their own lives; inevitably leading to 
significant rises in the rates of depression, 
anxiety and body dysmorphia, amongst many 
other health and behavioural issues.
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

“ Often, we can be right next to 
each other and they will still be 
‘Snapchatting’ each other.” — Aged 15
29
4.2 Quality of relationships 
The quality of social interactions diminishes 
the more devices are used.
116 Brown, Manago 
and Trimble (2016) found that the sheer volume 
of people and events, and the emphasis on 
popularity numerically quantified, lowered 
the quality of communication.
117
Dr. Caroline Fisher similarly argues that 
pathological internet use affects an individual’s 
sense of wellbeing and can lead to social 
withdrawal, self-neglect, poor diet and 
family conflict.
118 
The PISA Wellbeing report found that children 
who are ‘extreme internet users’ (defined 
as more than six hours) were 15.1% less likely 
than moderate users (1–2 hours) to report 
a sense of belonging, and more likely to 
report feeling lonely, at school.
119 Meanwhile 
a Common Sense Media report found that 
70% of American teenagers, aged between 
12 and 18 years, fight with their parents 
about their devices; 32% on a daily basis.
120 
The Education Policy Institute evidence 
review found that excessive internet use 
is preventing young people from developing 
strong relationships offline.
121
Online relationships can enrich a child’s social 
and emotional life, especially those who may 
be isolated in other settings. However, the 
persistent demands to interact often diminish 
the quality of relationships, levels of emotional 
understanding and create conflict. 
4.3 Opportunity cost
There is an undeniable truth that if you spend 
(or lose) a great deal of time doing one 
thing, something else must ‘give’. This is the 
opportunity cost.
Creativity, autonomy, memory 
The potential to access information, creative 
activities, undertake research or build and 
maintain important relationships online must 
not be ignored. But creative activities of UK 
children only occupy around 3% of their total 
time online,
122 meanwhile UK teenagers
123 are 
spending less time on informational, civic and 
creative activities now, compared with a few 
years ago.
124
“I love reading, but by the time I’ve spent 
an hour too long on my phone, I can no 
longer read my book.” 
Aged 17
MIT Professor Sherry Turkle notes: 
“The capacity for boredom is the single most 
important development of childhood. The 
capacity to self-soothe, go into your mind, 
go into your imagination. Children who are 
constantly being stimulated by a phone don’t 
learn how to be alone, and if you don’t teach 
a child how to be alone, they will always be 
lonely.”
125
Development of memory is another opportunity 
cost. Dr. Benjamin Storm’s (2016) research 
on internet use and memory found that when 
participants were allowed to use Google to 
answer questions, they used it even when they 
already knew the answer.
126 He commented: 
“Memory is changing. Our research shows that 
as we use the internet to support and extend 
our memory we become more reliant on it. 
Whereas before we might have tried to recall 
something on our own, now we don’t bother.”
127
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

“It is hard to live in a technological 
society and not get trapped in social 
media. You find that someone does 
it so you do too, and after a while 
you are addicted and miss out on 
things in life.” — Aged 14
30
Memory and imagination share the same 
set of development and cognitive needs as 
‘agency’ — that is, children making choices 
based on information that they can understand 
in conditions that allow for those choices 
to be meaningful.
128 
The development of memory is a key 
component of creating an individual’s identity, 
holding shared experiences and therefore 
forming a group identity — a necessity for 
building and maintaining communities and 
society.
Sleep and sleep deprivation 
Perhaps one of the most publicised opportunity 
costs of compulsive device use is sleep 
deprivation. In a large-scale 2016 survey 
for JAMA Paediatrics, academics from 
King’s College London found: 
“Bedtime use of media devices doubles 
risk of poor sleep in children.”
129
Specifically, it leads to inadequate sleep 
quantity, poor sleep quality and excessive 
daytime sleepiness because bedtime 
use disturbs sleep patterns of children 
and stimulates the brain’s production 
of melatonin.
130 
“I spent 14 hours on the computer in one 
day learning [a computer game]; I was up 
until 3am the next day.” 
Aged 17
Results from a three-year pilot programme in 
Canada that developed a school-based sleep 
promotion programme for students, found that 
children who don’t get enough quality sleep are 
more likely to have excess body weight, poorer 
diet quality, and lower physical activity levels.
131
Education 
London School of Economics (2015) research 
found that student performance in exams 
significantly increased post-mobile phone bans. 
Specifically, LSE researchers working with 
a group of low-achieving, low-income students 
found smartphone use in the classroom 
exacerbated existing educational inequalities.
132 
Students using phones during class time 
affect whole classrooms as well as individual 
academic performance. Daniel Pulliam, 
author of Effect of Student Classroom Cell 
Phone Usage on Teachers (2017) found 
that 87% of teachers were distracted by 
students using phones. He added that teachers’ 
cognitive processes, such as working memory 
and the ability to stay focused and maintain 
awareness, decreased and led to weakened 
classroom performance.
133 
The opportunity cost of attracting 
and keeping children online impacts 
on their creativity, autonomy, memory, 
sleep and education.
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

31
Some children and young people have a higher 
propensity towards using smartphones and 
tablets to excess. This changes over time and 
is closely linked to resilience as well as the 
ability to withstand environmental stimuli 
in a positive and constructive way.
From my experience working with young 
people who experience significant compulsive 
behaviours, their inability to manage the 
amount of time they spend online playing 
games, watching YouTube or being on social 
media is often closely linked to emotional 
states that may feel overwhelming. These are 
normally negative ones such as low mood, 
anger, feelings of abandonment and fear 
of social exclusion.
At times, these behaviours worsen as the young 
person disengages from previously rewarding 
activities and relationships in the real world. 
Someone may stop attending netball team 
practice or their music lessons and thus cut 
themselves off from a whole series of nurturing 
and positive relationships fuelled by shared 
interests to seek out online relationships with 
fellow gamers or friends. The more isolated the 
person becomes, the more likely they are to 
turn towards online activities to supplement the 
loss of interaction. Many end up as recluses in 
their bedroom when their activity has intensified 
in terms of hours. 
There is an ongoing debate as to whether 
some of these intense compulsive 
behaviours can be deemed to be addictions. 
For example, if someone is gaming 14 hours 
a day, he may be defined as suffering from 
Gaming Disorder. A young person playing 
online poker all night may be suffering from 
Gambling Disorder.
However, there are many more young 
people who use social media and gaming in 
an excessive way who, while not addicted, 
still use their mobile phones and tablets 
too intensely. This problematic use is 
often an attempt to navigate the difficulties 
of growing up in contemporary society.
Driving users to understand the need for 
screen-free time, for exercise and for real 
life interactions is part of a stimulus control 
approach to shaping behaviour that will 
benefit everyone, whatever their age.
When excessive behaviour 
becomes pathological 
Dr. Henrietta Bowden-Jones, 
Imperial College London, 
expert on behavioural 
addictions
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

32
We are entering unprecedented territory 
when it comes to parenting children in the 
digital world. When television first made 
its appearance in the 1950s there was 
widespread concern about the effect this 
would have on the way children learnt 
and played. 
While today’s narrative about the digital world 
is not so full of suspicion and fear, we are 
dealing with a far more ubiquitous issue with 
children as young as three-years-old having 
frequent access to smartphones and tablets. 
The research is growing but still lags behind 
the rapid pace of technological development. 
What is clear, however, is that we have 
to understand each child’s developmental 
needs in order to truly get to grips with 
the opportunities, as well as the risks, 
of digital engagement. 
For example, pretending or role playing 
is an essential past time for two to fiveyear-olds. The opportunity to play at being 
a grown up or to pretend to be a superhero 
serves an important function in terms 
of cognitive and social development, 
of identifying with others and building 
self-identity. 
Vast increases in digital use by pre-schoolers 
leaves less opportunity for important selfpropelled and imaginative play. 
The increase in digital play in this age group 
means that pre-schoolers are engaging in 
different types and quantity of pretend play, 
with, as yet, unknown consequences.
Let’s pretend: Creating 
opportunities to role play 
Dr. Angharad Rudkin, 
Children’s Clinical Psychologist 
and Associate Fellow of the 
British Psychological Society
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

33
Most of the rhetoric about risks and harms 
of a digital childhood is based on a relatively 
mechanistic understanding of human 
behaviour, it is concerned principally with 
nudges and primitive models of influence. 
This is not fit for purpose. The most 
promising alternative to this mechanistic 
thinking is Self-Determination Theory (SDT).
SDT provides a motivational continuum that 
runs from extrinsic motivation, carrot and 
stick prods, to autonomous self-regulation, 
behaviour that is guided by values 
and interests. 
Decades of ‘analogue’ research indicates 
that autonomous motivation reflects an 
individual’s internal desire to complete a 
task, while external motivators represent 
factors outside an individual’s control, 
including rewards that may encourage 
tasks or punishments that limit them. 
Satisfaction from completing a task 
is higher when young people are 
autonomously motivated. Quality 
of engagement across school, social 
and family is also higher. Put simply, 
the more autonomous the motivation, 
the greater the likelihood that resilience 
and positive behaviour will be sustained 
once the external motivator disappears. 
If we are going to move beyond the risks 
and harms framework we will need to 
replace it with something better. For young 
people to be autonomously motivated online, 
we need transparent science, grounded 
in established psychological models. This 
will shift us from a reactive to a proactive 
understanding of digital childhood and 
provide a framework to fruitfully engage 
policy, industry, and charity stakeholders 
in order that children have agency in the 
digital environment.
Prof. Andrew K. Przybylski 
Director of Research, 
Oxford Internet Institute
4.4 Profiling, personalisation 
and surveillance
Arguably a persuasive design strategy in 
itself, personalisation is a powerful tool by 
which a user is persuaded to extend use. 
Algorithms follow user behaviour patterns 
on such tight loops that they know the 
‘exact’ personalised mix of strategies that 
will work for each specific user. When it 
comes to children, these algorithms collect 
extremely intimate personal data. 
Lawyers Joe Newman, Joseph Jerome and 
Christopher Hazard explain that the move 
from standalone games to interactive online 
games brings with it a significant shift in the 
ability for game designers to: 
“...collect and generate enormous amounts 
of information about their players, much of 
which may be considered highly sensitive. 
This data includes information relating to 
the real world, ranging from a player’s voice 
or physical appearance to [their] location 
or social network. It also includes detailed 
information from the player’s actions within 
the game world, which may be analysed to 
create in-depth profiles of a player’s cognitive 
abilities and personality.”
134 
This loop of data gathering and profiling 
is a norm across all sectors of the digital 
environment and creates super-charged 
personalised profiling, described by 
Professor Lupton and Dr. Williamson in their 
paper The Datafied Child as ‘dataveillance’. 
Dataveillance (an amalgam of data surveillance) 
is defined as: 
“...the monitoring or evaluation of children 
by themselves or others that may include 
recording and assessing details of their 
appearance, growth, development, health, 
social relationships, moods, behaviour, 
educational achievements and other 
features.”
135
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

“Putting people into virtual worlds can 
be incredibly effective at changing 
their behaviour, and those changes 
can happen without the person’s 
awareness... What Facebook is today, 
with where virtual reality might go in 
the future, could be so destructive of a 
sense of truth, a sense of free will, the 
sense of the civil project. It could be 
really the destruction of us all.”
140 
Jaron Lanier, inventor of virtual reality
34
This surveillance codifies presumptions and 
assumptions about a child’s nature, their 
characteristics and ambitions at a time when 
children and young people are experimenting 
with, and exploring, their own identities. 
Professor Lupton and Dr. Williamson express 
concern that unless ‘scientific neutrality’ is 
imposed, children’s life chances and access 
to opportunities will be increasingly shaped 
by ‘social sorting’ that has little or no oversight 
and is constructed to gather highly sensitive 
personal information that is extremely valuable 
for marketing and other commercial or as yet 
unknown purposes.
136 
The power of personalisation and potential 
for social, personal control is not limited to 
commercial considerations. For example, 
in China the government is developing a 
Social Credit System to rate and rank the 
trustworthiness of all Chinese companies, 
legal entities and its 1.3 billion citizens. 
Data will be collected as users participate 
both as citizens and consumers. “The system 
not only investigates behaviour, it shapes it.”
137 
The complex algorithm that rates citizens has 
not been divulged, but factors such as credit 
history, personal characteristics, and behaviour 
and preferences are all taken into account. 
“The government is attempting to make 
obedience feel like gaming. It is a method 
of social control dressed up in some pointreward system. It’s gamified obedience.”
138 
Device dependence, the formation of 
hard-to-break habits, feelings of addiction 
and compulsion are all widely reported 
by children.
139 There are also questions 
about the legality, ethics and safety of 
creating dependence and habits at a time 
of immaturity and rapid development. 
4.5 The near future
There is no single vision of the future of tech, 
but the ethical and social issues raised by 
persuasive design will be magnified by the 
emerging dominance of Artificial Intelligence, 
Machine Learning and the Internet of Things. 
This inevitable amplification of impact has 
led to calls for more oversight. The New 
York Times journalist and tech analyst, Farhad 
Manjoo, speaks for many when he says:
“My default position about whether this 
stuff [technology] is going to be good 
or bad in the world has changed. So in 
the past, my reflexive bias of a new piece 
of technology tended toward optimism… 
it’s going to make us more efficient or 
help us connect with people and that has 
to be good… But I think we should all be 
more sceptical of the unseen and longer- 
term potential dangers of these technologies 
before we rush to embrace them.”
141 
As the digital environment becomes integrated 
with the physical environment, users will 
be automatically plugged in: not merely for 
extended use, but for permanent use. This 
will create a de facto situation where users 
are guided through life along algorithmically- 
determined pathways acting in the best interests 
of whoever owns or pays to use their data.
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

35
Imagine a near future in which refrigerators 
can sense when a child is hungry and offer 
snacks based on how much a company 
has paid for their product to be suggested. 
Who has responsibility for the nutritional 
needs of that child? Parent or carer? 
The Government? Or the company who 
controls the data gateway to the fridge? 
Or should the ‘perfect’ nutritional balance 
 be built into the artificial intelligence? 
If so, should ‘perfect’ be set against income, 
ethnicity, an ecological footprint, a daily 
read out of the child’s state of health, 
their family’s traditions, ethics of food 
production, or simply based on what 
they ate yesterday? What if it doesn’t 
spot the diabetic, a religious dietary 
requirement, or a life-threatening allergy? 
And what if that hungry child yearns 
occasionally for a chocolate bar but 
is only ever offered a carrot stick?
The Fridge Problem
Some of the questions raised by the Fridge 
Problem resemble existing ethical questions. 
Some are new. But a small set of questions 
about a smart fridge quickly amplifies into 
profound questions about self-determination, 
rights, liability and agency. 
The advent of smart homes, smart schools 
and smart cities, creating a world where your 
television knows when you have sat down, 
or where homework is shared with future 
employers, and a car is designed to decide 
who to save — you or the pedestrian — at 
the moment of a malfunction, means that 
human beings and intelligent machines will 
have to learn to coexist. But on whose terms?
In this context, the oversight of persuasive 
design strategies that prime human beings 
to behave in certain ways becomes an 
urgent ethical question for policy makers 
and civil society.
Chapter Four 
Impact of persuasive technologies 
on childhood

36
 5
Chapter 
Seeds of change
The World Wide Web is little more than a quarter of 
a century old.
142 Few anticipated its rapid dominance 
of economic and civic life — referred to as the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution.
143  
In the UK, the last great industrial revolution 
of the 19th century saw 17 Factory Acts,
144 
and vast swathes of further legislation on 
town planning, utilities, food safety and child 
labour, to balance societal needs against the 
rise of the commercial instincts of a handful 
of ultra-wealthy, industrial entrepreneurs. 
These acts included provisions that regulated 
the hours and welfare of children and young 
people.
145 
The assets of the digital revolution are less 
visible and more mobile. Cables and servers 
transport and store data across the globe 
blurring jurisdictional lines, making it harder 
to pinpoint the exact whereabouts of a user’s 
personal data. 
Whilst the multibillion-dollar market value of 
the most successful tech companies points to 
data as the ‘gold’ of the digital revolution each 
piece is hard to value. The lack of clarity as 
to where data sits and how much it is worth 
makes it difficult to find, regulate or tax. 
Whilst some continue to assert that these 
issues and the fast-moving nature of digital 
innovation preclude effective regulation, there 
is an increasingly active number who believe 
that the unfettered commercial freedoms 
singularly enjoyed by the tech industry 
create a negative environment and that limits 
must be set. Including limiting the impact of 
persuasive design strategies on the choices 
and outcomes of children and young people.
5.1 Upsetting the Apple cart
Apple’s chief design officer Johnny Ive, 
said that “constant use” (by children) of 
the iPhone was “misuse”, yet the device 
is deliberately designed to extend use.
146
In January this year, in a blow to Silicon 
Valley’s reputation, two of Apple’s largest 
shareholders, California State Teachers 
Retirement System and JANA Partners, 
(who own approximately $2 billion of its 
stock)
147 sent a letter to Apple
148 outlining 
their concerns about the damage of 
device addiction for young people because 
of persuasive technologies. 
The letter, voicing many of the same concerns 
raised by this report, highlights the persuasive, 
psychological features of social media sites 
and digital applications designed to be as 
addictive and time consuming as possible. 
Whilst acknowledging the great potential 
of the digital world, and recognising the 
value of responsible usage, the writers, 
mainly teachers and academics, cite a 
plethora of negative outcomes of excessive 
use. The letter outlines the negative effect 
on children’s wellbeing, including increased 
risk of suicide and depression, conflict with 
parents and adverse effects on children’s 
cerebral and social development. 
The authors found the efforts made by the 
technology sector to monitor and address 
the effects of their products on children and 
young people inadequate and highlight that 
options provided to parents to address their 
child’s usage are limited and also inadequate. 

37
Chapter Five 
Seeds of change
They urge Apple to set an example for the 
technology sector about the obligations of 
companies towards their youngest customers, 
by investing in enhanced software, and 
improving research and reporting to support 
and safeguard young people who will be 
the next generation of leaders, innovators 
and customers. 
As we go to press, Apple has announced 
changes to its operating system. We 
cautiously welcome the announcement 
but are yet to see how comprehensive the 
features are. Systemic change however, 
must still be implemented by all providers 
throughout the digital value chain.
5.2 The Age-Appropriate Design Code
In 2018, the UK Government introduced an 
Age-Appropriate Design Code into the DPA. 
Building on the requirement of the General 
Data Protection Regulation that provides 
that ‘children merit specific protection’, 
the Code will set out what the UK considers 
to be the high bar of data regulation needed 
to protect those under 18-years-old. The Code 
will take into account children’s development 
milestones and requires the regulator (the 
ICO) to prioritise the ‘best interests’
149 of 
children when considering what constitutes 
adequate data protection. 
Among the aspects of design to be 
considered by the Commissioner are 
strategies that encourage extended user 
engagement. This is the first time that 
questions raised by persuasive design 
will form part of a statutory regulatory 
framework, offering the opportunity to 
assess persuasive design strategies and 
militate their impact on children and young 
people. Shirley Cramer CBE, chief executive 
of Royal Society for Public Health, that 
co-authored #StatusofMind,
150 reacting 
to the introduction of the Code wrote: 
“There is a need for an informed public 
debate about how we protect children 
from the coercive and addictive elements 
of social media and future new technologies. 
To improve the mental health and wellbeing 
of our children we need to urgently mitigate 
the negative impacts of social media and 
accentuate the positives. The RSPH welcomes 
the new Age-Appropriate Design Code and 
believes it should be urgently implemented 
and rigorously enforced.”
As the implications of a ‘digital-first’ world 
become clearer, and the conflicts between 
Big Tech’s commercial imperative and 
society’s established norms are exposed, 
governments across the world have begun 
to consider how to apply existing legal 
principles to the online world, and adapt, 
enhance and add to legislation to tackle 
harms, business practices and impacts 
specific to the digital environment. 
The ubiquitous use of persuasive design 
strategies in the digital environment is an 
issue that affects almost all UK children. 
Whilst the digital environment tantalisingly 
embodies both progress and the promise 
of creativity and knowledge, its current 
dependence on persuasive technology makes 
it a toxic environment for children and young 
people that limits opportunity and creativity.

38
The current asymmetry of power 
between the developing child and the 
most powerful companies in the world 
is not in the ‘best interests’ of the child.
Children are vulnerable to mental health issues 
associated with identity development, familial 
and social pressure. The digital norms relating 
to extended use amplify these pressures and 
therefore their vulnerability. 
It is imperative that for children to engage 
purposefully and playfully online, the digital 
environment must be designed with their 
needs and rights in mind. 
5Rights Foundation wishes to see a global 
effort to set the ethics, governance and 
legal boundaries for the global technology 
companies and those that use technology 
to engage with children. This issue is bigger 
than any single nation state, bigger than 
a single company, and bigger than any 
single voice. 
All stakeholders have a duty to start the 
process towards ethical design standards 
of services for children.
The children and young people who 
contributed to this report and those 
who engage with 5Rights, want more 
choice, more control and more peace. 
Chapter Five 
Seeds of change

39
Executive summary
1. 
‘The Brain That Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph from 
the Frontiers of Brain Science’, Norman Doidge, Penguin, 2007
2. 
Article 3, United Nations Convention on the Rights of a Child
3. 
p. 13, ‘UK Children Go Online’, S Livingstone, October 2003
4. 
p.436, ‘The International Handbook of Children, 
Media and Culture’, S Livingstone, 2008
5. 
Paragraph 304, Growing up with the Internet
6. 
Question 103, Dr. Marc Bush, Corrected oral evidence: 
children and the internet, evidence session no. 7, 
15 November 2016
7. 
Question 104, ibid
8. 
Question 105, ibid
9. 
Article 3, UNCRC http://www.ohchr.org/EN/
ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx 
10. Written evidence from Children’s Media Foundation, 
(CHI0027),
11. ‘Life in ‘Likes’: Children’s Commissioner report into social 
media use among eight to 12-year-olds’, Children’s 
Commission, January 2018
12. https://thinkdifferentlyaboutkids.com
Introduction
13. ‘The history of smartphones: timeline’, The Guardian, 
24 January 2012 
14. ‘Children and Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report’, 
Ofcom, 29 November 2017
15. ‘Apollo lunar missions’ computing power vs your iPhone’, 
FutureCar, 27 November 2016
16. Children‘s quotes were made by members of the Young Scot 
5Rights Youth Leadership Group, February 2018
Chapter one
17. 
p.1, ‘Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products’ 
by Nir Eyal with Ryan Hoover, Portfolio Penguin, 2014
18. p.3, ‘Technology Addiction: Concern, Controversy and Finding 
a Balance’, Executive Summary, Common Sense Media, 
May 2016
19. ‘Our Digital Rights’, Young Scot 5Rights Youth Commission, 
May 2017 
20. p.4, ‘How Children Use Mobile Devices at School and at Home’, 
Dr. B Clarke, R Atkinson, S Svanaes, September 2015, 
21. p.17, ‘Technology Addiction: Concern, Controversy and Finding 
a Balance’, Research Brief, Common Sense Media, May 2016
22. ‘Secret lives of children and their phones’, Financial Times, 
6 October 2017
23. Ibid 
24. Comments made by members of the Young Scot 5Rights 
Youth Leadership Group, February 2018
25. ‘I worried people would forget about me: can teenagers survive 
without social media?’ The Guardian, 18 June 2016
26. p.2, ‘Technology Addiction: Concern, Controversy and Finding 
a Balance’, Executive Summary, Common Sense Media, 
May 2016
27. ‘Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants’, Mark Prensky, On the 
Horizon, MCB University Press, Vol. 9 No. 5, October 2001
28. ‘Children’s Online Risks and Opportunities: Comparative 
Findings From EU Kids Online’ and ‘Net Children Go Mobile’, 
Professor Sonia Livingstone et al, London School of Economics 
and Political Science, 2014 
29. Figure 48, p.106, ‘Children and Parents: Media Use and 
Attitudes Report’, Ofcom, 29 November 2017 
30. ‘Ten years since the Byron Review; Are Children Safer in the 
Digital World?’, NSPCC, February 2018; Discussed in ‘Children 
as young as three at risk from groomers on online games’ 
Daily Telegraph, 2 February 2018 
31. Internet Safety Strategy Green Paper, Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media and Sport, 11 October 2017
32. ‘Will Robots Steal Our Jobs? The Potential Impact of Automation 
on the UK and Other Major Economies’, PwC, March 2017
33. ‘How technology will change the future of work’, 
World Economic Forum, 24 February 2016 
34. All parent quotes from a Parentzone questionnaire on children’s 
time online and persuasive technologies, February 2018
35. p.231, ‘Children and Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report’, 
Ofcom, 29 November 2017 
36. p.191, ibid
37. Dscout web-based research platform paired with a 
smartphone app to capture in-the-moment behaviours. 
For this study, they recruited a demographically diverse 
sample of 94 Android users from a pool of more than 
100,000 participants. See ‘Putting a finger on our phone 
obsession’, Dscout, 16 June 2016
38. ‘Screen Time and Young Children: Promoting Health and 
Development in a Digital World’, Canadian Paediatric Society, 
27 November 2017 
39. Interviewed by 5Rights, February 2018 
40. Bett Show is an industry show for education technology, 
bringing together companies, start ups and attendees, 
including teachers, to discuss the future of technology and 
its role to enable educators and learners to thrive. In 2018, 
the Bett Show took place between 24-27 January and was 
attended by more than 34,700 people from 131 countries. 
41. ‘A tool or distraction? How schools’ approaches to mobile 
phones vary widely in the UK’, The Guardian, 15 December 
2017
42. p.27, ‘Tablets in Schools: How Useful Are They?’, Dr. Liz 
Fawcett, Association of Teachers and Lecturers, 2016 
Endnotes

40
43. p.16, ibid
44. See ‘Growing Up Digital Alberta’, Harvard Medical School 
Teaching Hospital, the Center on Media and Child Health, 
Boston Children’s Hospital, University of Alberta and the 
Alberta Teachers’ Association, 2016
45. Ibid
Chapter two
46. ‘Sean Parker unloads on Facebook: God only knows what it’s 
doing to our children’s brains’, Axios, 9 November 2017
47. ‘98 personal data points that Facebook uses to target ads to 
you’, The Washington Post, 19 August 2016 
48. Figure 2. ‘Private Traits and Attributes are Predictable from 
Digital Records of Human Behavior’, M Kosiniski, D Stillwell, 
T Graepel, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
April 2013; 110 (15) 5802-58052
49. Artificial intelligence developers build simulated neural 
networks that are able to process thousands of times 
more data. Developers are building better software, 
faster, using AI, TNW, October 2017
50. p. 788, ‘The Datafied Child: The Dataveillance of Children 
and Implications For Their Rights’, D Lupton, B Williamson, 
New Media and Society, Vol 19, Issue 5, pp. 780-794, 
23 January 2017
51. ‘Study: 81% of 2-year-olds have online presence‘ 
Digital Journal, October 2010
52. Slide 35, ‘Global top 100 companies by market capitalisation’, 
PwC, 31 March 2017
53. ‘The Need for New Design Ethics’, Tristan Harris
54. ‘Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What 
We Think and Do’, BJ Fogg, Ubiquity, Volume 2002 December, 
2002 Article No. 5 
55. ‘A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design’, BJ Fogg, 
Persuasive Technology Lab, Stanford University, 2009 
56. ‘The formula for phone addiction might double as a cure’, 
WIRED, 1 February 2018
57. ‘Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and 
Happiness’, R Thaler, C Sunstein, Yale University Press, 2008
58. http://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/about-us/ 
59. ‘Want to design user behaviour? Pass the ‘Regret Test’ first’, 
Nir Eyal, 2018
60. See http://humanetech.com/problem/
61. ‘Truth About Tech: A Roadmap for Kids’ Digital Well-being’ 
Common Sense Media and Centre for Humane Technology, 
February 2018
62. ‘Tech companies design your life, here’s why you should care’ 
Tristan Harris
Chapter three
63. ‘On money as an Instrument of Change’, Chamath Palihapitiya, 
Stanford Business School, 13 November 2017. Discussed 
in ‘Former Facebook exec says social media is ripping apart 
society’, The Verge, 11 December 2017 
64. ‘What is the role of dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, 
reward learning, or incentive salience?’ K Berridge, T Robinson, 
Brain Research Reviews, 28, 1998. 309–369. Referenced in 
‘Why we’re all addicted to texts, twitter and Google’, Dr. Susan 
Weinschenk, Psychology Today, 11 September 2012 
65. ‘How I kicked my addiction to the iPhone game Angry Birds’, 
Dr. Michael Chorust, Psychology Today, 4 January 2011 
66. Between 10–12 years old, children find it hard to think of the 
longer-term consequences and seek immediate rewards. 
p.18 ‘Digital Childhood: Addressing Childhood Development 
Milestones in the Digital Environment’, B Kidron and Dr. A 
Rudkin 5Rights, December 2017 
67. ’Association between portable screen-based media device 
access or use and sleep outcomes’, B Carter et al, JAMA 
Pediatrics, 170(12) 1202-1208 (2016)
68. ‘What happens to your brain when you get a Like on Instagram’, 
Business Insider, 25 March 2017 
69. ‘How I kicked my addiction to the iPhone game Angry Birds’, 
Dr. Michael Chorust, Psychology Today, 4 January 2011 
70. ‘An Angry Birds empire: games, toys, movies and now an IPO’, 
New York Times, 5 September 2017 
71. ‘How I kicked my addiction to the iPhone game Angry Birds’, 
Dr. Michael Chorust, Psychology Today, 4 January 2011 
72. ‘The Brain That Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph from 
the Frontiers of Brain Science’, N Doidge, Penguin, 2007
73. Ibid
74. p. 20, At 13 to 15-years-old, children are “Highly dependent 
on peers for a sense of wellbeing. They need to feel as if they 
are part of a group.” ‘Digital childhood: Addressing childhood 
development milestones in the digital environment’, B Kidron, 
Dr. A Rudkin, 5Rights, December 2017
75. ‘Motivational, emotional, and behavioral correlates of fear 
of missing out’, AK Przybylski et al, Computers in Human 
Behavior, Volume 29, Issue 4, pp. 1841-1848 July 2013 
76. Ibid
77. ‘The inventor of the Facebook Like: “There’s always going 
to be unintended consequences.”’, Alphr, 20 October 2017 
78. This is known as the ‘orienting reflex’. See Chapter 4.1. 
‘Treatment of Attentional Problems’, G DeGangi, Pediatric 
Disorders of Regulation in Affect and Behavior (Second 
Edition), 2017
79. p.17, Ibid
80. ‘Examining the interface of family and personal traits, media, 
and academic imperatives using the learning habit study’, 
R Pressman et al, The American Journal of Family Therapy, 
42:5, 347-363, doi:10.1080/01926187.2014.935684, 2014
81. p.7, Children and Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report, 
Ofcom, 29 November 2017 
Endnotes

41
82. Machine Learning focuses on teaching computers to learn 
for themselves, coding them to think like human beings, 
while Artificial Intelligence concentrates on mimicking human 
decision making processes and carrying out tasks in ever more 
human ways. See ‘What is the difference between artificial 
intelligence and machine learning?’, Forbes, 6 December 2016 
83. “Optimal Time uses a machine learning algorithm to 
automatically predict when a user is likely to open your push. 
It sees the highest success rates. Optimal Time accounts 
for users’ individual engagement patterns, sending push 
notifications when users are prone to open the app. The 
intelligence of the algorithm contributes to much higher 
open rates.” p.26 Personalize or Bust: the Impact on App 
Engagement, Leanplum
84. ‘Why timely weekend push notifications do better’, 
Leanplum, 30 June 2016 
85. ‘Optimising Notification Timing’, Kevin Kahn, KahnText, 
5 February 2016 
86. ‘Pushier notifications: how social media is getting more 
invasive’, New Statesman, 28 June 2017 
87. ‘Our minds can be hijacked: the tech insiders who fear a 
smartphone dystopia’, The Guardian, 6 October 2017 
88. Ibid
89. ‘Media multitaskers pay mental price, Stanford study shows’, 
Stanford News, 24 August 2009 
90. ‘Rapid changes in social media apps are forcing us all 
to keep up’, Evening Standard, 16 March 2017 
91. ‘Sean Parker unloads on Facebook: “God only knows what it’s 
doing to our children’s brains”’, Axios, 9 November 2017
92. ‘Social media is tearing society apart’, The Times, 
15 November 2017 
93. ‘Happy birthday to YouTube? It’s now a terrifying cesspit 
of clickbait’, The Guardian, 24 April 2018
94. ‘You’ll be outraged at how easy it was to get you to click 
on this headline’, WIRED, 18 December 2015 
95. A study by MIT professors of the diffusion of all the verified 
true and false news stories distributed on Twitter between 
2006 and 2017 found that true stories took about six times 
longer than falsehoods to reach 1,500 people. ‘The spread 
of true and false news online’, S Vosoughi, DRoy, S Aral, 
Science: Vol 359, Issue 6380, 9 March 2018 
96. ‘The online disinhibition effect, 20 years later’, J Suler, ‘Fifteen 
Eighty Four: Academic Perspectives from Cambridge University 
Press’, 10 May 2016
97. p.20,‘Digital Childhood — Addressing Childhood Development 
Milestones in the Digital Environment’, B Kidron, Dr. A Rudkin, 
5Rights, December 2017
98. ‘Liquid surveillance and social media: three provocations’, 
The Society Pages, 25 February 2013 
99. ‘Tide pod challenge: blaming stupid millennials is the 
easy way out’, The Conversation, 25 January 2018 
100. ‘Cat Videos on YouTube: 2 Million Uploads, 25 Billion Views’, 
Tubular Insights, 29 October 2014 
101. ‘Watching cute cat videos is instinctive and good for you 
— seriously’, CNN, 20 January 2016 
102. ‘Baby schema in human and animal faces induces cuteness 
perception and gaze allocation in children’, M Borgi et al, 
Frontiers in Psychology, 5: 411, 2014
103. ‘Watching cute cat videos is instinctive and good for you 
— seriously’, CNN, 20 January 2016 
Chapter four
104. ‘The secret social media lives of teenagers’, New York Times, 
7 June 2017 
105. ‘How does social media impact the mental health of young 
people?’, Dr. Linda Papadopoulous, Internet Matters, 
12 April 2017; and ‘Use of multiple social media platforms 
and symptoms of depression and anxiety’, B Primack, et al, 
Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 69; 1–9, April 2017 
106. Leah Shafer, ‘Social media and teen anxiety’, Harvard Graduate 
School of Education, 15 December 2017 
107. ‘Problematic smartphone use: a conceptual overview and 
systematic review of relations with anxiety and depression 
psychopathology’, J Elhai et al, Journal of Affective Disorders 
207, 251-259, 2017 
108. ‘Multitasking may harm the social and emotional development 
of tweenage girls, but face-to-face talks could save the day, 
say Stanford researchers’, Stanford News, 25 January 2012
109. p.28, Ditch the Label, ‘The Annual Bullying Survey’, 2017 
110. p.29, ibid
111. The survey of 1,002 young people aged 11–18 by Plan 
International UK found that 235 out of 486 girls and 202 
of 510 boys reported that they had experienced online 
abuse. 14 August 2017 
112. p.32 ‘The Internet on our Own Terms: How Children and Young 
People Deliberated About their Digital Rights’, S Coleman et al 
5Rights, January 2017
113. p.30, ibid
114. ‘#sleepyteens: social media use in adolescents is associated 
with poor sleep quality, anxiety, depression, and low 
self-esteem’, C Woods, H Scott, Journal of Adolescence, 
2015; ‘Frequent use of social networking sites is associated 
with poor psychological functioning among children and 
adolescents’, Hugues Sampasa-Kanyiga and Rosamund Lewis, 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 18(7): 
380-385, July 2015 
115. p.30 Ditch the Label, ‘The Annual Bullying Survey’, 2017
116. ‘Tempted to text: College students’ mobile phone use during 
a face-to-face interaction with a close friend’, G Brown, 
A Manago, J Trimble, Emerging Adulthood, 4(6), 440-443, 
2016
117. Ibid
118. ‘Lost Online: an Overview of Internet Addiction, Advances 
in Psychiatric Treatment’ V Murali, S George, Advances in 
Psychiatric Treatment, 13, 24-30 2007 Referred to in ‘Getting 
Plugged In: An Overview of Internet Addiction’, Dr. Caroline 
Flisher, Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health pp. 557–559, 
Volume 46, Issue 10, October 2010
Endnotes

42
119. ‘PISA 2015 Results (Volume III): Students’ well-being’, 
OECD, April 2016
120. p.3 ‘Technology Addiction: Concern, Controversy and Finding 
a Balance’, Executive Summary, Common Sense Media, 
May 2016
121. p.23, ‘Social media and children’s mental health: a review 
of the evidence’, Education Policy Institute, June 2017
122. ‘The Common Sense Census: Media use by tweens and teens’, 
Common Sense Media, November 2015
123. 9 to 16-year-olds
124. p.3, ‘Net children go mobile: the UK report’, S Livingstone 
et al, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2014
125. ‘Breaking free of our addictions to persuasive technology’, 
IBM, 18 May 2017 
126. ‘Using the Internet to access information inflates future use of 
the Internet to access other information’, B Storm, S Stone, 
A Benjamin, Memory, pp.717–23, 2016
127. ‘Cognitive offloading: How the internet is increasingly taking 
over human memory’, Science Daily, 16 August 2016 
128. p.7 ‘Digital Childhood: Addressing Childhood Development 
Milestones in the Digital Environment’, B Kidron and Dr. A 
Rudkin 5Rights, December 2017
129. ‘Association between portable screen-based media device 
access or use and sleep outcomes’, B Carter et al, JAMA 
Pediatrics. 170(12):1202-1208. 2016
130. Ibid
131. ‘Availability and night-time use of electronic entertainment 
and communication devices are associated with short sleep 
duration and obesity among Canadian children’, H Chahal 
et al, Pediatric Obesity, September 2012
132. ‘Ill Communication: Technology, Distraction & Student 
Performance’, L Beland, R Murphy, Centre for Economic 
Performance, LSE, Discussion Paper No 1350 May 2015
133. ‘Effect of Student Classroom Cell Phone Usage on Teachers’, 
D Pulliam, Masters Theses and Specialist projects, 
Paper 1915, 2017 
134. p.ii ‘Press Start to Track?: Privacy and the New Questions 
Posed by Modern Videogame Technology’, J Newman, 
J Jerome and C Hazard, American Intellectual Property Law 
Association, Quarterly Journal, 2014
135. ‘The Datafied Child: The Dataveillance of Children and 
Implications For Their Rights’, D Lupton, B Williamson, 
New Media and Society, Vol 19, Issue 5, pp. 780-794, 
23 January 2017
136. Ibid
137. ‘Who Can You Trust? How Technology Brought Us Together 
and Why It Could Drive Us Apart’, R Botsam, Penguin Portfolio, 
October 2017
138. Ibid
139. ‘Life in Likes: Children’s Commissioner’s report into social 
media use among 8–12 year olds’, January 2018
140. ‘Social media is tearing society apart’, The Times, 
15 November 2017 
141. Terry Gross interviewing Farhad Manjoo on Fresh Air, 
‘How 5 Tech Giants Have Become More Like Governments 
Than Companies’, National Public Radio, 26 Oct 2017
Chapter five
142. ‘The birth of the web’ CERN
143. ‘The Fourth Industrial Revolution: At a Glance’, 
World Economic Forum, April 2016 
144. ‘The Factory Acts’, Technicaleducationmatters.org 
16 February 2016
145. Ibid 
146. Appendix B: Illustrative list of data elements and segments, 
‘Data brokers: a call for transparency and accountability’, 
Federal Trade Commission, May 2014
147. ‘Apple investors warn iPhones and other technology may be 
hurting children’, 8 January 2018, New York Times, https://
www.nytimes.com/2018/01/08/business/apple-investorschildren.html 
148. Open letter from Jana Partners and CalSTRS to Apple Inc, 
6 January 2018, https://thinkdifferentlyaboutkids.com/ 
149. Article 3, UN Convention on the Rights of a Child
150. See https://www.rsph.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/status-ofmind.html
Endnotes

43
Baroness Beeban Kidron OBE 
Founder of 5Rights Foundation
Baroness Kidron sits in the House of Lords as 
a Crossbench peer where she is a member 
of the Communications Committee. She is 
also a Commissioner on the UN Broadband 
Commission for Sustainable Development, a 
member of The Royal Foundation Taskforce on 
Cyberbullying and a member of the Technical 
Working Group for the Child Dignity Alliance. 
Kidron is the co-founder of charity Into Film, 
which uses film to educate school children, 
running more than 9,000 film clubs in UK 
schools. Before entering the House of Lords in 
2012, she spent more than 35 years working as 
a filmmaker in film, television and documentary. 
Alexandra Evans 
Chief of Strategy at 5Rights Foundation 
Evans is the former Policy Director of the British 
Board of Film Classification (BBFC) and oversaw 
the passage of the Digital Economy Act, for 
which the BBFC will be the regulator. A qualified 
lawyer, for many years she worked in law firm 
Mishcon de Reya’s public policy team where 
she advised on a wide range of public interest 
and human rights law issues.
Authors & contributors
Authors
Jenny Afia 
Partner at Schillings 
Afia is a privacy lawyer and was Spear’s 
Reputation and Defamation Lawyer of the 
year in 2015. She has been involved in many 
landmark privacy cases such as Rocknroll 
v NewsGroup Newspapers Ltd, which 
addressed how social media content can 
be used by third parties, as well as the 
first civil case concerning revenge porn, 
JPH v Persons Unknown. 
As part of her work on the Children’s 
Commissioner’s Digital Task Force, Afia 
re-wrote terms and conditions for major 
social media companies, so that children and 
young people could better understand them. 

44
Authors & contributors
Prof. Joanna R Adler 
Professor of Forensic Psychology 
at Middlesex University
Adler is a BPS- and HCPC-registered forensic 
psychologist. She has been conducting research 
and evaluating interventions in and around youth 
justice for more than two decades. 
Adler applies both qualitative and quantitative 
approaches to her research and has conducted 
several systematic reviews of evidence. 
Whether exploring how young people respond 
after victimisation, or considering efficacy of 
sanctions imposed on those who have offended, 
her findings have led her to believe that it has 
never been more important to consider the 
impact of real and digital blended identities on 
young people’s experiences and development 
from youth across the lifespan.
Dr. Henrietta Bowden-Jones 
Honorary Clinical Senior Lecturer 
at Imperial College London
Bowden-Jones is the founder and director of 
the National Problem Gambling Clinic in the 
UK, the only NHS service (CNWL NHS Trust) 
designated for the treatment of pathological 
gamblers. The clinic has been running for 
ten years. She runs a gambling disorders 
research group and has been the recipient of 
Medical Research Council grants and Wolfson 
Fellowships as well as several prizes and 
awards. She is a medical doctor, specialising in 
addiction psychiatry and an Honorary Clinical 
Senior Lecturer, in the Department of Medicine, 
Imperial College, where she teaches. 
Her current roles include: president elect 
of the Medical Women’s Federation, Royal 
College of Psychiatrists’ spokesperson 
on Behavioural Addictions, board member 
of the International Society of Addiction 
Medicine and member of the Royal Society 
of Medicine’s Psychiatry Council. 
Contributors
Dr. Liam Hackett 
Founder and CEO of Ditch the Label
Hackett has founded and grown Ditch the Label 
into an organisation that helps thousands of 
people every month. It is now one of the largest 
anti-bullying charities in the world, and last year 
alone supported 1.1 million people globally.
Hackett sits on advisory boards across the 
third sector and governmental departments 
and has contributed to various academic and 
government reports at UK, EU and USA level. 
Working across a multitude of countries and 
languages, he regularly speaks, debates and 
contributes articles throughout the press, radio 
and TV on a range of issues surrounding bullying, 
cyberbullying, equality, discrimination, gender, 
self-esteem, masculinity, digital technology and 
young people. He regularly speaks publicly in 
places such as The White House, The United 
Nations, the European Parliament and the 
Houses of Parliament, in addition to live public 
events with audiences of up to 12,000. 
Anisha Juj 
Intelligence Consultant at Schillings
Juj is an intelligence specialist with a wealth 
of experience in leading investigations, building 
investigative strategies and providing threat 
assessments. Having worked in Government, 
and latterly the financial and legal sectors, 
she utilises her knowledge of open source 
and social media intelligence to identify threats 
and mitigate risks to privacy and security.

45
Authors & contributors
Prof. Andrew K. Przybylski 
Director of Research 
at University of Oxford 
Professor Przybylski is an experimental 
psychologist and Director of Research at the 
Oxford Internet Institute. His work is mainly 
concerned with applying psychological models 
of motivation and health to study how people 
interact with virtual environments including 
video games and social media. He is particularly 
interested is integrating open, robust, and 
reproducible science with evidence-based 
policymaking in the digital age. 
Dr. Angharad Rudkin 
Child Clinical Psychologist 
at University of Southampton 
Rudkin (MA (Oxon) CPsychol AFBPsS) is a 
clinical psychologist and associate fellow of the 
British Psychological Society. She has worked 
with children and their families for more than 
15 years, using her academic background 
to provide and supervise evidence-based 
interventions with families. 
Rudkin lectures in child psychology at the 
Doctorate in Clinical Psychology course at the 
University of Southampton, supervises research 
and examines theses. She sits on the editorial 
board of Clinical Psychology Forum. 
Young Scot 
5Rights Youth Leadership Group 
Launched in February 2018 by Young Scot, 
the Scottish Government and 5Rights, the 
Young Scot 5Rights Youth Leadership Group 
is a diverse group of 30 young people from 
across Scotland, aged 11 to 19, who champion 
their rights in the digital world. Building on the 
recommendations co-designed by the Young 
Scot 5Rights Youth Commission in their report, 
‘Our Digital Rights’ (May 2017), the group 
focuses on investigating how Scotland can 
realise young people’s rights in the digital world.

The 5Rights are;
46
About 5Rights Foundation
5Rights Foundation takes the existing rights 
of children and young people as codified by 
the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
and articulates them for the digital environment. 
• The Right to Remove
• The Right to Know
• The Right to Safety and Support
• The Right to Informed and Conscious Use
• The Right to Digital Literacy
A digital environment fit for childhood must 
be deliberately designed to meet the needs 
of children and young people, while equipping 
them with the skills and competencies 
to manage their journey to adulthood in 
a ‘digital-first’ world. 
5Rights Foundation works with a unique and 
interdisciplinary network of child development 
and mental health experts, computer scientists, 
academics, policy makers, UX designers, and 
most importantly, children — who are often our 
most enlightened partners. 

5rightsframework.com 
schillingspartners.com