EU REGISTRATION ID NUMBER 523145616037-10 
Paris, 6 August 2021 
Paris EUROPLACE’s response to the European Commission’s feedback 
on Artificial intelligence – ethical and legal requirements​2021/0106 (COD) Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down 
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act) and amending certain Union legislative acts. ​  
Paris EUROPLACE -which represents Paris International Financial Centre’s actors, French as 
well as international corporates, investors, banks, financial intermediaries and other financial 
services providers- welcomes the opportunity to contribute to the debates regarding the 
incoming regulatory framework on Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
Our main message aims to reflect the absolute necessity to maintain a competitive regulatory 
regime in the European Union compared to other jurisdictions. Whilst taking account of 
technical and sectoral peculiarities, the long-term objective of fair, balanced and competitive 
rules has to be clearly highlighted and even upgraded for the EU, in order to avoid undue 
regulatory divergences or gaps between jurisdictions. A vigilant monitoring of these risks 
across the world and a real willingness to strengthen the level playing field for the Union should 
go hand in hand with agility and flexibility when it comes to react and to modify some European 
rules when needed. 
Consequently, four main considerations have to prevail, in our view, through this consultation: 
1. First, in terms of level playing field, the direct and indirect costs of the 
contemplated regulation seem very significant to us, especially for credit risk 
assessment where associated risks are estimated high. In particular, certification 
costs over the life cycle of a product (machine learning, for example) notably include 
the involvement of significant human resources, monitoring systems and possibly 
high frequency updates (daily in the most extreme cases) regarding algorithms. Due 

to such possibly elevated costs, we want to highlight the risk that only a very few 
numbers of players in Europe might be in a situation to comply with such a very 
challenging regulatory framework, posing additional risks in terms of European 
sovereignty and competition within the EU. We would recommend to give more 
clarity to the impact assessment in particular for a system where significant 
monitoring and retraining is required, highlighting the human resources required to 
comply with this regulation. 
2. Secondly, against a backdrop where data are key but tricky to manipulate, the 
obligation set to ban any error in the datasets looks very ambitious, if not 
unrealistic, from a practical and business point of view. 
a. While we welcome the willingness to control biases, rules on age in the 
domain of credit assessment, for example, exist and could not be easily 
changed. These rules constitute biases which are important to be taken into 
account to reflect the higher risks associated with these populations. 
Moreover, biases may exist that could not be ruled out entirely due to the 
impossibility to truly assess them in the first place. 
b. It seems important to precise how pretrained models (that are now widely 
used due to the cost to build these models) would be treated (as the data used 
to train them may not be easily available or controllable). 
c. Moreover, while we welcome the specific treatment of providers from third-
party jurisdictions, we want to raise that this regulation may give an 
advantage to them. Compared to what may be done by big international firms 
with data that could be obtained in other jurisdictions, this situation may lead 
to distortions in terms of competition. In addition, a significant drag may 
appear on incentives to innovate, as these barriers to entry the market could 
hamper some firms to challenge the business model of corporates which are 
already well established (European companies may decide to stop 
developing applications that are considered high risk while foreign 
companies would have to adapt their systems built in other jurisdictions 
which pose significant risks for our sovereignty). As a consequence, some 
transitory measures may be needed for companies in order to smooth the 
costs embedded in the new regulation framework (and measure put in place 
to avoid such distortions). 
3. Third, definitions matter a lot, but many do not seem clear enough to enable a 
proper implementation of the regulation (for example what exactly constitutes 
an AI system). Indeed, we think more clarity and precision are needed to exactly 
understand and comply with the regulation to come. In many cases, we think 
definitions are too abstract to be correctly understood and made applicable. 
4. Last but not least, it is key to precise how this regulation would be translated at a 
national level and to precise mechanisms in case of disagreement between the spirit 
of this regulation and the national implementation. We also recommend that during 
the innovation phase, authorities allow a right for mistake, independent of the use 
of a sandbox, to avoid the further development of the Proof of concept syndrome 
(companies stop right after the POC because the results of the POC, while promising 

but not free of error, could pose a compliance risk that companies, too afraid by the 
repressive measures presented by the regulation, are not willing to take) that would 
hinder innovation and may reduce cooperation between startups and corporates. 
This position aims at reflecting the views expressed by representatives of market players, while 
it also takes into account some remarks shared by public authorities. Some of these contributors 
have been listed in Annex 1. Our response is thus structured around two main goals covering 
the issues raised in the European Commission’s document: 
i) 
Properly defending the competitiveness of the EU industry against any future 
regulatory divergence post-Brexit requires to correctly define the regulation to 
come; 
ii) 
Flexibility and adaptability of the rules will be critical to correctly design the 
characteristics of an appropriate regulatory architecture for the EU framework 
compared to what other jurisdictions may decide in a very near future. 

Paris EUROPLACE Working Group on the EC Consultation: Composition 
The corresponding Working Group included notably the following members, 
listed in alphabetical order: 
Arnaud de Bresson, Paris EUROPLACE: bresson@paris-europlace.com 
Nicolas Méric, Dreamquark: nicolas.meric@dreamquark.com 
Olivier Vigna, Paris EUROPLACE: olivier.vigna@paris-europlace.com 