Page | 1 
SEMI Europe Comments 
on the Proposal for Regulation laying down Harmonized Rules 
on Artificial Intelligence 2021/0106z(COD) 
July 2021 
Summary 
SEMI Europe welcomes the European Commission’s “Proposal for Regulation laying down harmonized 
rules on Artificial Intelligence” and appreciates the opportunity to provide its feedback on this crucial 
matter for Europe’s microelectronics industry. 
With the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI), the European Union (EU) remains determined to play a leading 
role in setting a global standard in the responsible development and use of AI technologies. The 
microelectronics industry supports such efforts but with a key caveat. While the industry acknowledges 
that development and deployment of AI requires a coordinated approach, it asserts that AI systems and 
related technologies should be regulated where possible by existing EU laws and regulations, including 
sector-specific ones. By building on already existing frameworks such as the EU Machinery Directive and 
the Product Liability Directive, appropriate rules concerning the safety and reliability of novel AI systems 
can be introduced without creating additional regulatory and administrative burdens on AI developers, in 
particular SMEs. 
Building on Europe’s competitiveness and strategic position in the global electronics supply chain, sound, 
industry-backed approach to regulate AI should be the cornerstone of Europe’s technological ambitions. 
Only by creating the right regulatory environment, Europe can seize new growth opportunities arising 
from the next wave of AI generated in connected devices and technologies at the edge. 
SEMI Europe makes the following policy recommendations pertaining to Europe’s new approach to AI for 
the consideration of the European Commission, the Parliament and the Council: 
I. 
Definition of AI systems is too vague and broad, requires further clarification 
II. 
AI use cases should be regulated by adapting existing EU product regulation 
III. 
Introduce data quality thresholds on data sets used in training, testing and validation of all AI 
applications 
IV. 
Establishing standards for AI systems addressing potential risks and enabling innovation 
V. 
Introduce Industry Advisory Expert Groups as part of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 

Page | 2 
Introduction 
AI technologies have become a transformative force, enabling technology breakthroughs across 
industries. Because of AI, autonomous driving, advanced medical diagnostics, accelerated drug 
development, voice-activated devices, self-healing digital grids, predictive weather monitoring systems 
and self-replicating robots have become part of our daily life. 
Europe’s microelectronics industry, as a world leader in embedded electronics, MEMS, sensors and 
imagers, holds a unique position to drive the development of AI-based solutions. Many semiconductor 
manufacturers already use AI in devices deployed across factories increasing manufacturing efficiency and 
improving yields. For instance, AI enables the real-time collection and monitoring of big data, informing 
system administrators of any hardware failures or deviations from intended operation. AI also makes it 
possible to automate adjustments and corrections to production processes by providing feedback that 
can drive higher manufacturing efficiency. Such benefits resulting from the use of specific AI applications 
such as machine learning, have proven that AI has become an invaluable asset for European 
manufacturers. 
AI technologies are critically important for economic and industrial leadership globally. 
While businesses in China and U.S. are counted among top adopters of AI, European enterprises are 
quickly catching up with their global competitors. According to a 2020 study published by the European 
Commission, 42% of Europe’s enterprises make use of at least one AI technology, quarter of them use at 
least two, while 18% are considering to adopt AI technologies in the next two years. ​European Commission, 2020: European enterprise survey on the use of technologies based on artificial intelligence ​  While AI is initially 
introduced as a measure to improve existing processes such as production task optimization, many 
enterprises are likely to develop the AI further, modifying existing AI algorithms for new use-cases, 
spurring innovation and uptake of the technology. 
The success of developing and deploying AI depends not only on business and their innovation strategies. 
In recent years, governments worldwide introduced research and development frameworks in support of 
national AI development and uptake. These range from China’s “Next Generation Artificial Intelligence 
Development Plan”, U.S. “Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence” 
to South Korea’s “National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence”. However, governments face more than 
challenges of creating the right R&D conditions to support domestic development of AI. Many are 
assessing how accountability, transparency, control, and safe development of AI technologies can be 
ensured without curbing innovation and economic growth. 
The Commission’s Proposal for Regulation laying down Harmonized Rules on Artificial Intelligence 
indicates EU’s willingness to move forward and capture the huge potential of AI enabled technologies. 
Building on Europe’s competitiveness and strategic position in the global electronics supply chain, a 
sound, industry-backed coordinated approach on the development and use of AI should be the 
cornerstone of Europe’s technological ambitions. Only by creating the right regulatory environment, 
Europe can seize new growth opportunities arising from the next wave of AI generated in connected 
devices and technologies at the edge. 

Page | 3 
Against this background, SEMI Europe would like to share its views on the proposed regulation on Artificial 
Intelligence with the European Commission to reflect the interests of the electronics manufacturing 
industry: 
I. 
Definition of AI systems is too vague and broad, requires further clarification 
AI and its applications are rapidly evolving, increasing the portfolio of products and services available to 
consumers worldwide. As new use-cases for AI emerge, tailored AI-enabled solutions are adopted across 
industries, responding to the specific needs of manufacturers and end-users alike. 
Over the years, advances in AI enabled the maturing of many of its applications, introducing new 
algorithms to advance production processes optimization in manufacturing, improve sensing capabilities 
of automated vehicles or enhance image labeling in medical robots. This leap has contributed not only to 
the advent of new AI software, but also hardware technology across different domains. 
Embedded into an increasing variety of products and solutions, AI itself has proven difficult to define. 
Currently neither industry or the scientific community have reached a consensus on an exact definition or 
mechanisms to classify AI. This is largely because of the growing variety and specific properties of AI 
technologies, but also the intersection with other fields such as statistics. 
The definition of AI proposed by the Regulation in Article 3 focuses largely on any software using machine 
learning methods or logic-based procedures. In larger context, this includes any software using 
optimization or statistical methods. Since almost every existing or future software could be covered by 
such set of rules, unpredictable risks could arise for any company using or developing any program based 
on logical computation. 
In this light, SEMI Europe considers the definition of AI in the proposed Regulation too broad and vague, 
attributing AI characteristics to methods that can also be assigned to more conventional software. We 
encourage the European Commission to take into account a definition of AI, that precludes to a high 
extend first order human interpretation (“fast thinking”) and instead operates on the basis of solid logic 
using sufficient relevant data. It should be stated that most likely in the end AI should not be restricted 
to a given type of technology, and for sure the definition of AI will have to evolve while learning the scope 
and (ethical) impact of its applications in the years to come. 

Page | 4 
II. 
AI use cases should be regulated by adapting existing EU product regulation 
Applications of AI can vary across industries and use-cases. Deploying and developing AI in different 
sectors often results in outcomes, accompanied by various sets of problems, leading to the conclusion 
that a one-size-fits-all approach particularly on High-Risk AI use cases is not suitable for an AI regulation. 
The microelectronics industry is already a subject to multiple use case specific regulations, providing a 
solid foundation for the regulation of AI. For instance, incorporation of AI in semiconductor manufacturing 
equipment has been done in a way that is compatible with the existing framework of the Machinery 
Directive (2006/42/EC). This Directive is well-adapted to emerging technologies and is the appropriate 
compliance mechanism for the semiconductor manufacturing industry. 
The Machinery Directive provides a comprehensive set of essential health and safety requirements while 
remaining technology neutral. Its Annex I, the Essential Health and Safety Requirements (EHSRs) are 
foundational requirements, and the provisions are deemed applicable for the risks associated with 
incorporation of AI in the machine. The Machinery Directive also incorporates appropriate flexibility and 
by promoting the use of safety standards, it can address particular requirements for machine types and 
their unique uses and hazards. It entrusts organizations competent in standards development taking the 
current stage of technology into account to achieve compliance by defining technical specifications. This 
framework was and is instrumental in the Machinery Directive maintaining its relevance as a cornerstone 
of semiconductor manufacturing equipment design. 
The Machinery Directive requires that machinery placed on the market is safe to operate based on its 
intended use. To assure safety compliance, Annex I requires the machinery manufacturer or an authorized 
representative to conduct a risk assessment to determine the particular health and safety requirements 
applying to the machinery, then design and construct the machinery to meet those mandates. Also 
required by Annex I, machinery control systems must be designed to prevent any hazards in the event of 
system hardware or software errors such as failures in the control system logic. Only when the output 
from machine learning constitutes a part of functional safety (e.g. the output from machine learning is 
used to adjust a parameter of safety-related control system (SCS) that executes functional safety), 
transparency of algorithm and datasets may become critical to satisfy the safety requirement, but in such 
case applicable harmonized standard for functional safety will address this issue. 
Machine learning algorithms never change the function or the intended use of semiconductor 
manufacturing equipment or the response of the interface between the equipment and the human 
operator and therefore do not create any unforeseen health and safety risks. The control system of any 
machine under the scope of the Machinery Directive is already designed and constructed in a way that it 
prevents the use of machine beyond its intentional use conditions. 
Based on the stated above, SEMI Europe recommends to the Commission to review existing product safety 
and liability regulations and if necessary, revise and update conditions to safely regulate potential 
applications of AI Considering the broad spectrum and complexity of some AI systems (e.g. neuromorphic 
computing), specific characteristics of such applications should be taken into account. 

Page | 5 
III. 
Introduce data quality thresholds on data sets used in training, testing and validation of all AI 
applications 
Today, development and use of AI is practically impossible without access to large amounts of data. The 
more data is available, the better AI may become. Access to large amounts of data is however not the 
only criterion to determine accuracy and reliability of AI systems. To operate efficiently, quality data are 
essential for AI systems to generate value and deliver desired results for developers and end-users alike. 
In the Proposal the European Commission suggests “the training, validation, and testing data shall be 
relevant, representative, free of error and complete.” While the condition to have error free data sets is 
highly desirable, it is rarely the case. 
Many criteria can be looked upon when assessing the quality of data used for AI applications. 
In general, factors such as data accuracy, timeliness, consistency, interoperability, or validity determine 
the quality of data sets. Such characteristics can be met with high degree of sufficiency, but rarely in 
perfect, error free condition. For example, data used for training, validation and testing of AI often 
originates from numerous sources and is collected in ways varying in purpose, meaning the standards on 
what is considered a good or right quality characteristics for data can vary. For some use-cases data sets 
are formed out of undefined, raw data, while others require data to be well defined, structured and 
consistent. For example, continuous learning systems such as neuromorphic AI use data collected 
throughout their use, making it extremely difficult if not impossible to determine a universal set of data 
quality requirements. 
Against this background, SEMI Europe encourages the European Commission introduce quality thresholds 
on data sets used in training, testing and validation of all AI applications. Such thresholds should provide 
a clear set of quality conditions, characteristics, and key performance indicators below which failure to 
satisfy would be deemed as unacceptable. 
In addition, dataset descriptions and labels for providing information on the quality and structure of 
datasets should be taken into consideration. This approach would allow AI datasets to be described 
similar to hardware components, assessing their compliance with any set of quality thresholds. Datasets 
including sensitive information on a company’s IPR could include detailed information on the data 
collection process, dataset creation, pre-processing and validity of the dataset. Especially for data for use 
in health applications high-quality labels for data integrity should be considered. In order to ensure crossdatabase consistency we will have to think as well about defining a common taxonomy and ontology in 
this field. There is currently no standardized way of describing datasets agreed upon in the field of AI. 
Such a standardization would have to allow for flexibility to be able to include the variety of possible data 
for-mats and collections used in AI applications. It goes without saying that developing an objective 
method to validate data sets will have to go hand in hand with experience on how AI will be defined over 
time, and therefore be a dynamic process. 
Moreover, it is essential also to look at protection of the databases. There are two different elements in 
here. The first being that we need technical measures to safeguard that when a database is shared with 
regulatory/ government the knowledge will not become public. The second being that we should strive 

Page | 6 
for a general statement in the database directive that takes into account the protection of valuable own 
generated data rather than only data collected by other sources. 
IV. 
Establishing standards for AI systems addressing potential risks and enabling innovation 
In the global manufacturing ecosystem, standards play a key role in advancing the innovation of numerous 
technologies and systems, enabling the integration of smart manufacturing solutions across industries. 
As businesses embrace AI, they increasingly look for standards to guide their efforts to improve 
interoperability, communication, security, efficiency and productivity of existing and emerging 
manufacturing technologies. 
European standardization efforts are an important step in guiding ethical research and development of 
AI, addressing potential barriers and risks that could hinder efficient and secure operation of AI systems 
and technologies. AI standards are a valuable asset to Europe’s industrial competitiveness reducing 
system operation costs, easing emerging markets penetration, advancing the dissemination and 
exploitation of technological expertise among SMEs and start-ups. It is crucial for the EU and the 
electronics manufacturing industry that standardization efforts keep pace with the global AI development, 
so that Europe remains at the forefront of standardization of emerging technologies. 
According to Article 41 of the proposed regulation on AI, the Commission may by means of implementing 
acts, adopt common specifications (for high-risk AI applications) where harmonized standards do not exist 
or where the Commission considered that relevant harmonized standards are insufficient. 
SEMI Europe appreciates the European Commission’s efforts to drive standardization of AI, while 
considering the need for addressing insufficient or missing standards. To generate reliable, innovationfriendly AI standards, a consensus-based approach among regional and international standardization 
bodies, organizations and industry players is crucial. The collective effort should focus not only on the 
improvement of existing AI standards, but also on areas where standards are limited or non-existent, 
referring to standardization of categories of systems that are directly influenced by AI. Examples are 
systems with impact on Medical procedures, impact on Smart mobility (Automotive, Aerospace), and 
impact on Defense actions. These categories and more will have to be defined and standards (including 
definition of overriding AI control) will have to be agreed upon. 
SEMI Europe would like to bring to the attention of the Commission the SEMI International Standards 
Program. The initiative brings together industry experts, stakeholders and professionals, driving the 
development of standards in regards to technological innovation and needs of the global industry. 
Since the inception of the program, over 1000 developed standards have assisted the global 
manufacturing industry in engaging the challenges of increased productivity, improved product reliability, 
operations quality and resource efficiency. 

Page | 7 
As a neutral platform, the program enables the exchange of information among competing 
manufacturers, suppliers and users resulting in technically accurate, specific standards. SEMI standards 
development spurs collaboration among industrial partners and competitors, resulting in joint ventures, 
technological partnerships and increased competitiveness. SEMI produced standards are developed for a 
broad spectrum of audiences, serving engineers and managers as guidelines for enhanced productivity 
and innovation enabled by emerging technologies. 
V. 
Introduce Industry Advisory Expert Groups as part of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 
SEMI Europe fully supports the Commission’s plans to set up a European Artificial Intelligence Board to 
ensure effective and consistent implementation and enforcement of the proposed AI regulation. 
Considering Europe’s key strength as regulatory power in the global AI landscape, SEMI Europe urges the 
Commission to introduce sector-specific industry expert advisory groups as part of the Board to play a key 
role in the application and enforcement of the regulation. In this respect, industry working groups should 
advise the Commission and Member States on specific issues in areas that need complementary expertise 
such as AI standards, AI safety, product compliance or labeling. Such collaborations are necessary in 
creating the right regulatory environment to accelerate the development and market uptake AI 
applications, amongst others, in smart health, mobility, manufacturing and agriculture. 
For example, the microelectronics industry which is already a subject to numerous regulations on product 
compliance and safety, is well positioned to offer its expertise, best practices and recommendations 
regarding the development and use of AI technologies in Europe. 
It should be noted as well that supervision and guidance provided by competent authorities must include 
a requirement that information and results disclosed to the competent authorities be kept confidential 
until, at least, a decision has been made on whether registered IP rights, such as a patent application or 
utility model, can be filed. 
As a good practice, SEMI Europe would like to bring to the attention of the Commission SEMI's Smart 
Data-AI Communities. SEMI is actively developing collaborative platforms to build communities through 
the Smart Data-AI Industry Advisory Council and the Chief Technology Officer Forum. These strategic 
platforms bring together key industry players, gathering expertise and knowledge on big data and AI to 
drive growth and improve collaboration of businesses on these critical technologies. Further, these 
initiatives create a cross-disciplinary community platform to drive pre-competitive innovation of AI 
technologies in the microelectronics industry. 

Page | 8 
Conclusion 
The Commission’s proposal for a regulation on AI indicates Europe’s willingness to move forward to 
capture the huge potential ahead in the rapidly emerging AI technologies. SEMI Europe would welcome 
the opportunity to discuss the above-mentioned recommendations with the European Commission, the 
Parliament and the Council. The microelectronics sector is a key enabler and remains ready to work 
together with all interested stakeholders to develop new avenues of growth to reinforce Europe’s AI 
leadership. 
About SEMI Europe 
SEMI Europe is the European arm of SEMI, the industry association connecting more than 2,400 
semiconductor and electronics manufacturing companies worldwide, including nearly 300 European 
headquartered businesses. SEMI members are responsible for the innovations in materials, design, 
equipment, software, devices and services that enable smarter, faster, more powerful and more 
affordable electronic products. Since 1970, SEMI has built connections that have helped its members 
prosper, create new markets and address common industry challenges together. 
Association Contact 
Marek Kysela, Senior Coordinator Advocacy, SEMI Europe | mkysela@semi.org 