BVI​BVI represents the interests of the German fund industry at national and international level. The association promotes 
sensible regulation of the fund business as well as fair competition vis-à-vis policy makers and regulators. Asset 
Managers act as trustees in the sole interest of the investor and are subject to strict regulation. Funds match funding 
investors and the capital demands of companies and governments, thus fulfilling an important macro-economic function. 
BVI’s 116 members manage assets some EUR 4 trillion for retail investors, insurance companies, pension and retirement 
schemes, banks, churches and foundations. With a share of 27%, Germany represents the largest fund market in the EU. 
BVI’s ID number in the EU Transparency Register is 96816064173-47. For more information, please visit www.bvi.de/en. ​  position on the Commission’s proposal laying down harmonised rules on artificial 
intelligence 
BVI welcomes the opportunity to provide its views on the European Commission’s proposal laying down 
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence. 
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in asset management bears great 
potential. An increasing degree of automation of processes and interfaces has been common practice 
in the asset management industry for decades and is described with the keywords ‘business process 
automation’ (BPA) or ‘robotic process automation’ (RPA). RPA aims to automate even more complex 
process steps along the value chain in the asset management industry. An example of this would be a 
standardised online client check and initial advice in the securities business, possibly using language 
programmes. The use of AI is a major issue in the financial sector, as these technologies will bring 
about a profound change in society and the economy. AI goes beyond BPA and RPA by combining the 
use of large or increasingly available, but often unstructured and internal and/or external data sets with 
the improved possibilities for using these data. Through a combination of analytics and mass available 
data, new insights are to be gained that would not be possible with traditional research methods. The 
German supervisory authority BaFin was one of the first supervisors to analyse the challenges and 
implications for supervision and regulation of financial services in its report ‘Big Data meets artificial 
intelligence’. BaFin concludes that big data and AI bring about a profound change and enable 
innovation, successful implementations can spread rapidly, and supervision and regulation must 
address innovative developments early. Thus, we welcome the European Commission’s proposal on 
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence to establish a principal-based regulatory framework in the EU. 
Asset management will be significantly influenced by improved availability of data, algorithms, 
digitalisation of assets, new processes in custody and settlement, and reporting. Quality data is a 
prerequisite for the provision of any service along the entire value chain in asset management, from 
research, portfolio and risk management, trading to clearing and settlement. Secure access to and 
availability of high-quality financial market data at all times is also indispensable in fund distribution or in 
regulatory and reporting. In the future, more and more non-traditional data sources ("big data") will be 
integrated into the asset managers' business operations. 
Financial market data are often offered by natural monopolies and oligopolies such as stock exchanges 
and companies with a dominant market position. These have great market power and can set onesided conditions, since the users on the asset manager side rely on such data and any disruption would 
jeopardise their business. The use of financial market data has therefore for years been associated with 
regular, sometimes massive price increases and the conclusion of increasingly complex data licences 
Frankfurt, 
6 August 2021 

for the asset managers. With increasing cost pressure and the change of business models to more 
quantitative or passive investment, data costs are becoming more and more a success factor for many 
asset managers. The BVI advocates a revision of the existing EU regulations for the provision and use 
of financial market data on appropriate commercial terms, e.g. in MiFID/MiFIR, Credit Rating Agencies 
Regulation (CRAR), and an implementation of data user effectively protective regulations, e.g. in the 
Benchmark Regulation and the various EU regulations on regulatory reporting. Data charges should be 
determined on the basis of the marginal cost of producing and disseminating the data. 
Important aspects to be considered in relation to the supervision and regulation of AI 
A key question related to AI models from the supervisory perspective is how they can be 
integrated/classified into existing regulatory frameworks. In our view, this depends on the businesses’ 
ability to continue operating without accountability or intermediaries. This is evident in the area of 
blockchain technology for instance. The application of technologies based on decentralised computing 
structures pushes regulation to its limits. Thus, supervisors face the challenge of how to regulate 
companies whose business models are based on technologies that cannot be regulated. In this case, 
the focus should not be on the classification in existing regulatory frameworks but rather on the 
business models and the technologies used. 
In general, we believe the classification of AI applications should not be based on the function as such 
but rather on the share of the value chain within the company. A chatbot, for example, could be highly 
critical if it is used as the primary medium for customer contact and for concluding contracts. Other 
areas of application of a chatbot could in turn be completely uncritical. We therefore welcome the 
proportionality principle in the Commission’s proposal. 
We recommend that additional requirements be carefully examined and internationally coordinated as 
we see the risk that different regions will be regulated to varying degrees. This means that a locational 
disadvantage could arise in highly regulated countries (keyword "regulatory arbitrage"). Furthermore, 
this could hamper innovation if regulation is applied to different degrees. With Luxembourg and 
Singapore, financial centres are already emerging that are very open to new technologies and provide a 
corresponding infrastructure (also in terms of regulation). A race should be avoided here. 
Another aspect relates to documentation. We support the idea that there should be documentation of 
the algorithms. This is necessary for further development of the technology but should already be 
sufficiently regulated. AI applications sometimes make decisions based on several million data points, 
i.e. although the original algorithm can be documented, the characteristics depend on the data used to 
train the algorithm. A simple rule-based description of which decisions are made for which reason is 
then no longer possible (this is also obvious, if this were possible, a simple rule-based system could be 
used). 
Promotion of open global standards 
For the success of big data and AI applications in the market and with consumers, there is a need to for 
regulators to promote the development and application of open global standards that can be freely used 
by all market participants: 
1. AI is based on standards. AI needs at least standards for data structure, model interpretation, 
identification of the AI application and AI governance. 

2. AI and big data: leading big data and AI applications require large, parallel computer systems to 
process large data sets to identify patterns and correlations. However, the data sets required for selflearning systems – including those from the public sector – are often not available to the public or only 
at unreasonable conditions. The open data / eGovernment initiatives in Germany, the EU, but also the 
USA are to be supported in order to enable the development of a big data and AI market. 
3. Big data and AI applications are reliant on other capabilities such as speech recognition, universal 
translation systems and text analysis tools. In addition to voice, photo, image and video streaming 
sources of all kinds are other high-volume data sources that applications must be able to process. 
However, the best algorithm, e.g. for investment advice between (bank) sales and the 
customer/consumer, cannot be offered if speech recognition is necessarily performed by "Alexa", "Siri" 
or similar proprietary applications. In contrast to the Internet with open http/html standards that can be 
freely used by all market participants, the communication channels mentioned are legally and 
practically sealed off and can contribute to the formation of monopolies by predominantly US and Asian 
providers. BDAI must therefore not be seen as the application of various scientific findings but should 
be regarded as a science in its own right, which must be based on global standards that are open and 
freely usable for all market participants. 