For the attention of the European Commission
Re: The Proposed Regulation on the use of artificial intelligence (AI)
Dear Sir/Madam,
We hope this finds you and your colleagues well.
We write with regards to the proposed regulations on the use of AI, published by the
European Commission (the “Commission”) for public consultation on April 21, 2021: the
European EdTech Alliance (EEA) fully supports the EU Commission in its commitment to
ensure that its citizens, and in particular, children across the EU remain safe when engaging in
digital activities such as online learning. Furthermore, we would welcome the opportunity to
discuss these proposals with you to better offer our collective insights and convey to the EC
our sincere concerns regarding the impact of your proposals on the education technology
(EdTech) industry, as well as, on the advancement of future educational technology solutions.
The Alliance boasts a coalition of over 20 European trade associations, who represent more
than 1,500 European EdTech suppliers, many of whom stand to be affected by the proposed
Artificial Intelligence Act (the “Regulation”).
There can be no doubt that AI will play an increasingly critical role in raising the standards and
accessibility of education in the next few years and beyond, especially as we look to help our
young people recover and recoup learning deficits incurred as a result of the global COVID-19
pandemic.
Simultaneously we must tackle the pan-European challenges for up-skilling and re-skilling the
workforce to secure the competencies needed for both the digital and environmental
transformation of all industries. Education is of utmost importance: it is integral to the
prosperity and competitiveness of our continent.
The future of European education innovation depends on the quality and insightfulness of the
regulatory framework. However, a 360 degree view of the consequences of such a framework
must also consider the risks and opportunities its implementation will bring, both for learners,
companies and other stakeholders. The Commission can then build, in confidence, the support
needed to securely scaffold the implementation of its AI regulation and to proactively harvest
the enormous potential technology has to meet our challenges.

We believe that we have many concerns in common that need to be addressed, for example:
-We know about the potential risks of poorly designed AI-technology
-We are also aware of the risks of not investing in AI to help solve our most pressing
challenges.
-Many emerging and innovative digital education companies are currently in the early
stages of growth. EdTech is a young and often fragile industry consisting of many small
and medium sized companies (many of them at early stage typically consisting of only
two to five team members), as well as, a few larger corporations. How will the coming
regulations affect them and how might support be designed to stimulate and not stifle
innovation in order to help them to incorporate ethical AI practices into the design of
their solutions and embed in them the need to be fully transparent in terms of how
they intend to collect, collate and use any data collected from their customers?
-What
can
we
learn
the
regulatory
problems
arising
technical
implementations of the GDPR and how GDPR was interpreted by many companies, the
Education sector, customers and national and EU regulators?
Experience
GDPR
shows
that
European
regulations
also
influence
technical
development in all regions of the world, and if the new proposed AI regulations are designed
well and implemented correctly, they will secure the stronghold of the European education
sector, secure the future skills for the coming generations and at the same times secure
innovation in the sector and potentially open up new areas of business for the European
EdTech industry and thereby job creation.
We would be more than happy to share our collective insights on the shaping of the coming AI
regulations and how we can support technology innovation in education to meet our future
challenges. With this in mind, may we propose a meeting to discuss with your working group
ways in which, together we might ensure a thriving European educational technology industry
to cater to our common goals for education while also creating a competitive advantage of
European education technology on a global scale, setting the standard of safety and integrity
of learners first?
We are currently collecting insights from our far-reaching community of EdTech companies to
assist you in your preparation for the forthcoming AI regulation.

Best regards, on behalf of the European EdTech Alliance,
Svenia Busson, VP, EdTech France, contact: +33 6 73 70 49 18, svenia@learnspace.fr
Jannie Jeppesen, CEO, Swedish Edtech Industry
Esben Trier, CEO, EdTech Denmark
Roel Bellinga, Member of the Board, Dutch Edtech
Philippe Mero, VP, AFINEF
Pierre Laborde, VP, AFINEF
Märt Aro, Chairman of the Board, Nordic EdTech Forum - N8
Heini Karppinen, Chairman, Edtech Finland
Anne-Charlotte Monneret, Director, EdTech France
Tobias Himmerich, CEO, of EDUvation, Germany
The European EdTech Alliance is a not-for-profit international trade association that, through its
members, represents more than 1500 EdTech start-ups and companies across 23 countries in
Europe and that we exist to encourage cross-border cooperation and education innovation in
Europe. Our collective goal is to achieve a higher quality, more holistic, accessible education for
all.