Press release 
12 October 2020 
BMW Group code of ethics for artificial intelligence.  
Munich. The use of artificial intelligence (AI) is a central element of the digital 
transformation process at the BMW Group. The BMW Group already uses AI throughout 
the value chain to generate added value for customers, products, employees and 
processes. 
Building on the fundamental requirements formulated by the EU for trustworthy AI, the 
BMW Group has worked out seven basic principles covering the use of AI within the 
company. These will be continuously refined and adapted as required according to the 
multi-layered application of AI across all areas of the company. In this way, the BMW 
Group will pave the way for extending the use of AI and increase awareness among its 
employees of the need for sensitivity when working with AI technologies. 
Company 
Bayerische 
Motoren Werke 
Aktiengesellschaft 
Postal address 
BMW AG 
80788 München 
Telephone 
+49 89 382 60340 
Internet: 
www.bmwgroup.com 

 2 
Seven principles covering the development and application of artificial 
intelligence at the BMW Group: 
Human agency and oversight. 
The BMW Group implements appropriate human monitoring of decisions made by 
AI applications and considers possible ways that humans can overrule algorithmic 
decisions. 
Technical robustness and safety. 
The BMW Group aims to develop robust AI applications and observes the applicable 
safety standards designed to decrease the risk of unintended consequences and 
errors. 
Privacy and data governance. 
The BMW Group extends its state-of-the-art data privacy and data security 
measures to cover storage and processing in AI applications. 
Transparency. 
The BMW Group aims for explainability of AI applications and open communication 
where respective technologies are used. 
Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness.  
The BMW Group respects human dignity and therefore sets out to build fair AI 
applications. This includes preventing non-compliance by AI applications. 
Environmental and societal well-being. 
The BMW Group is committed to developing and using AI applications that promote 
the well-being of customers, employees and partners. This aligns with the BMW 
Group’s goals in the areas of human rights and sustainability, which includes climate 
change and environmental protection. 

 3 
Accountability. 
The BMW Group’s AI applications should be implemented so they work responsibly. 
The BMW Group will identify, assess, report and mitigate risks, in accordance with 
good corporate governance. 
Overall centre of competence for the company: “Project AI”. 
“Project AI” was launched in 2018 to ensure that AI technologies are used ethically and 
efficiently. As the BMW Group’s centre of competence for data analytics and machine 
learning, it ensures rapid knowledge and technology sharing across the company. 
Project AI therefore plays a key role in the ongoing process of digital transformation at 
the BMW Group and supports the efficient development and scaling of smart data and 
AI technologies. One of the developments to come out of Project AI is a portfolio tool 
which creates transparency in the company-wide application of technologies making 
data-driven decisions. This D³ (Data Driven Decisions) portfolio currently spans 400 use 
cases, of which more than 50 are available for regular operation. 
In the event of enquiries please contact: 
Martin Tholund, Press Spokesperson Research, New Technologies, Innovations 
Tel.: +49-89-382-77126, e-mail: martin.tholund@bmwgroup.com 
Benjamin Titz, Head of BMW Group Design, Innovation & Motorsport Communications 
Tel.: +49 (0)179 – 743 80 88, e-mail: benjamin.titz@bmw.de 
The BMW Group 
With its four brands BMW, MINI, Rolls-Royce and BMW Motorrad, the BMW Group is the world’s leading 
premium manufacturer of automobiles and motorcycles and also provides premium financial and mobility 
services. The BMW Group production network comprises 31 production and assembly facilities in 15 
countries; the company has a global sales network in more than 140 countries. 
In 2019, the BMW Group sold over 2.5 million passenger vehicles and more than 175,000 motorcycles 
worldwide. The profit before tax in the financial year 2019 was € 7.118 billion on revenues amounting to 
€ 104.210 billion. As of 31 December 2019, the BMW Group had a workforce of 126,016 employees. 
The success of the BMW Group has always been based on long-term thinking and responsible action. The 
company has therefore established ecological and social sustainability throughout the value chain, 
comprehensive product responsibility and a clear commitment to conserving resources as an integral part 
of its strategy. 

 4 
www.bmwgroup.com  
Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/BMWGroup 
Twitter: http://twitter.com/BMWGroup 
YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/BMWGroupView 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/bmwgroup 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/company/bmw-group/ 