1 
Liberty Global supplementary 
position paper on the role of 
AI in telecommunications 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning 
will play a major role in the transformation of 
telecommunications networks and services, as 
key drivers of software-defined networking 
and network function virtualization. Electronic 
communications regulatory authorities are 
best placed to oversee artificial intelligence 
and machine learning in the context of the 
telecommunications sector, taking a holistic, 
birds-eye view, which takes the challenges 
posed by artificial intelligence into account. 
The harmonized regulatory framework 
applicable to telecoms, which places great 
emphasis on technological neutrality, is 
suitable to address those challenges. In light 
of these developments, Liberty Global 
supports the European Commission’s decision 
to classify the application of artificial 
intelligence in telecoms as ‘low-risk’ in its AI 
White Paper and subsequent policy 
documents. 
Our evolving networks fulfil a vital role 
Europe’s electronic communications networks 
and services fulfil a vital economic and 
societal role. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic 
has underscored their importance for the 
ability of European end-users to work from 
home, to engage in eLearning and – very 
importantly – to continue their social lives by 
having meaningful connections with friends 
and family.  
1 European Commission and BEREC, Joint Statement on coping 
with the increased demand for network connectivity due to the 
Covid-19 pandemic, BoR (20) 66 (2020). 
2 https://www.libertyglobal.com/whats-new/covid-19-ourresponse/; https://www.libertyglobal.com/covid-19-a-messagefrom-our-ceo/. 
Our continuous investment and innovation 
resulted in resilient and high-capacity 
networks. These evolved over time to meet 
the ever-increasing demand for connectivity 
and to adjust to new services and use cases. 
Our networks today provide lower latency, 
higher speeds, and greater security and 
resilience, benefiting end-users and the wider 
society. ​Oxera, Gigabit broadband: what does it mean for consumers 
and society?, (2019). ​  
A pivotal point in network innovation 
Network innovation is fast approaching an 
inflection point, as the changes foreseen by 
the next generation of networking are more 
profound than mere increases in speed or 
capacity. Softwarization and virtualization of 
network functions, at the heart of this 
development, represent a major shift in the 
configuration of networks, impacting both 
their design and operation. ​S. Gijrath, (Re-)Defining Software Defined Networks under the 
European Electronic Communications Code, ELAW – 007 (2019). ​  ​BEREC, Input paper on potential Regulatory Implications of 
Software-Defined Networking and Network Functions 
Virtualisation, BoR (16) 97 (2016). ​  
On an abstract level, IP-based networking 
relies on the joint operation of the control 
plane and the user data plane in each device. 
The former draws a network topology and 
decides how traffic should be handled. The 
latter handles traffic according to the control 
plane’s instructions. The distinction between 
the two planes is logical, not necessarily 
physical. Their seamless interaction is the 
basis for the success of the internet in its 
current form. 
Basics of software-defined networking  
The logical decoupling of these control planes 
and data planes is key to software defined 
networking (SDN) and network function 
virtualization (NFV). It allows SDN to 

2 
centralize all control plane functions on a 
network at a single SDN controller, as 
opposed to the decentralised operation of 
control planes in current networks. The SDN 
controller’s birds-eye view enables it to 
operate networks in a dynamic and 
responsive manner. SDN also supports 
universal abstraction overlays for diverse 
infrastructure, enabling technologyindependent network operation. 
NFV is complementary to SDN. NFV uses SDN 
to virtually create, anywhere in a network, key 
functionality for that network’s operation. For 
example, in current networks, adding routing 
capacity at a particular location requires the 
physical installation of routers and cabling at 
that location. Conversely, NFV enables the 
virtual creation of routing capacity at the 
most appropriate location at any moment, 
without placing new devices. 
In a nutshell, SDN centralises the control of 
key network functionalities, providing a 
software overlay and NFV uses that overlay to 
dynamically (re)create and operate those key 
network functionalities. 
Software-defined networking requires 
application of artificial intelligence  
SDN and NFV make networks programmable, 
which in turn makes them more flexible, 
scalable, and reliable. This facilitates agile 
service deployment and the lowering of 
capital and operational expenses, allowing for 
more innovation and investment to the 
benefit of Europe’s end-users.  
6 D. Wei, et al., Guest Editorial: Leveraging Machine Learning in 
SDN/NFV-Based Networks, IEEE JSC, vol. 38, no. 2, (2020). 
7 S. Troia, et al., Machine Learning-assisted Planning and 
Provisioning for SDN/NFV-enabled Metropolitan Networks, IEEE 
EuCNC, (2019). 
8 A. Sundelin, Leveraging Machine Intelligence and Operations 
Analytics to Assure Virtualized Networks and Services, SCTE/ISBE 
Technical Paper (2017). 
9 D. Manias, et al., The Need for Advanced Intelligence in NFV 
Management and Orchestration, IEEE Network (forthcoming). 
However, this dynamic operation of networks 
requires the real-time processing of vast 
amounts of information and the rapid, 
coordinated execution of tasks. These 
challenges can only be addressed through the 
application of artificial intelligence (AI) and 
machine learning (ML) to SDN controllers and 
in NFV mechanisms.   ​A. Gebremariam, et al., Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning in the Area of SDN and NFV: A Survey, 
IEEE SSD’19 (2019). ​  The application of 
AI is also key to ensure the security of SDN 
and NFV deployments, as well as to address 
the security challenges posed by parallel and 
related trends, such as the increasing number 
of connected devices (IoT). ​A. Molina Zarca, et al., Semantic-Aware Security Orchestration 
in SDN/NFV-Enabled IoT Systems, Sensors (Basel), 20(13): 3622 
(2020). ​  ​M. Bagaa, et al., A Machine Learning Security Framework for 
IoT Systems, IEEE Access, (2020). ​  
Artificial intelligence in telecoms cannot 
be viewed as a standalone issue  
The critical role foreseen for AI and ML 
applications in the forthcoming evolution of 
next-generation networking instigated by SDN 
and NFV, means that the potential regulatory 
challenges posed by the use of AI and ML in 
the telecoms sector cannot be viewed in 
isolation. Instead, telecoms regulators and 
policymakers must develop a holistic view of 
the subject-matter and take the relevant 
context of SDN and NFV into account. 
Liberty Global commends BEREC and ENISA 
for realizing this at an early stage. Both 
conducted extensive studies into the 
implications of SDN and NFV, as well as into AI 
and ML on a separate basis. Several national 
regulators and authorities, such as the Dutch 
Radio communications Agency followed suit. ​BEREC, BoR (16) 97 (2016). ​  

3 
14 15 16 These public stakeholders agree that 
the current telecoms regulatory framework is 
fit for purpose to address the challenges 
posed by SDN, NFV and enabling technologies, 
such as AI and ML. 
The regulatory framework created by 
the Code is fit for purpose 
The European Electronic Communications 
Code (Code) foresees the creation of a 
harmonized regulatory framework, aimed at 
promoting innovation and investment in the 
telecoms sector, to the benefit of end-users. 
Technological neutrality and the principles of 
proportionality and appropriateness are 
cornerstones of the Code, which also 
emphasises the rights of end-users. 
The European legislature envisaged the Code 
to be the instrument upon which regulatory 
requirements for SDN and NFV – and 
consequently AI and ML applications enabling 
such network innovation – shall be based. ​Consideration 14 of the Code references SDN explicitly. ​  ​S. Gijrath, (Re-)Defining Software Defined Networks under the 
European Electronic Communications Code, ELAW – 007 (2019). ​  
Relevant regulators and authorities are 
already acting upon that intent, developing 
the capabilities to cope with any potential 
challenges in this domain. ​For example, in June 2020, ENISA established its Ad-Hoc 
Working Group on Cybersecurity for Artificial Intelligence. ​  
The concurrent application of potentially 
conflicting rules, or regulatory oversight by 
another regulator which lacks the capability 
and jurisdiction to view AI applications in 
electronic communications within the 
relevant context, is at odds with the 
objectives of the Code. The Code aims to 
achieve regulatory clarity and stability, by 
delegating independent oversight to specific 
regulators and authorities only, which in turn 
14 ENISA, Threat Landscape and Good Practice Guide for 
Software Defined Networks/5G, (2015). 
15 BEREC, Looking into the crystal ball: A report on emerging 
technologies and security challenges, version 1.0, (2018). 
16 Van der Vorst, et al., Managing AI use in telecom 
infrastructures: Advice to the supervisory body on establishing 
risk-based AI supervision, Commissioned by: Dutch 
Radiocommunications Agency, (2019). 
17 Articles 1 and 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/1972 (Code). 
best incentivizes investment, innovation and 
thus consumer welfare. 
The Commission’s AI initiatives should 
complement the Code’s regulations 
This does not mean that electronic 
communications providers should be exempt 
from all potentially forthcoming measures 
aimed at ensuring AI is deployed in the EU 
under an appropriate legal and ethical 
framework. 
As Liberty Global submitted in its response to 
the Commission’s consultation of its White 
Paper on AI, the risk-based approach outlined 
therein is key to achieve the twin objectives of 
promoting a rapid uptake of AI and addressing 
potential risks. ​Liberty Global, Response to the consultation of the European 
Commission’s White Paper on Artificial Intelligence, (2020). ​  
Under this risk-based approach, it might be 
appropriate to regulate particular applications 
of AI for which extra safeguards are 
warranted, such as those involving biometric 
data. ​Liberty Global, Response to the roadmap (IIA) on Artificial 
intelligence, 2020. ​  Such use cases, which are outside the 
domain of telecoms regulation, can be 
subjected to new rules without harming the 
harmonized application of the Code. 
Electronic communications providers using 
such applications will have to so in accordance 
with generally applicable rules. 
Harnessing the power of harmonized 
standards to promote values-based AI 
In Liberty Global’s view, potential legislative 
acts on AI must set a high-level framework. 
Detailed conformity requirements for 
products and services are best laid down in 

4 
Harmonized Standards. The application of 
standards in the telecoms sector and other 
domains of the internal market is a success, 
improving regulatory clarity, technological 
neutrality and promoting self-regulation. 
About Liberty Global 
Liberty Global is one of the world’s leading 
converged video, broadband and 
communications companies, with operations 
in six European countries under the consumer 
brands Virgin Media, Telenet and UPC. We 
invest in the infrastructure and digital 
platforms that empower our customers to 
make the most of the digital revolution. 
Our substantial scale and commitment to 
innovation enable us to develop marketleading products delivered through next 
generation networks that connect 11 million 
customers subscribing to 25 million TV, 
broadband internet and telephony services. 
We also serve 6 million mobile subscribers 
and offer WiFi service through millions of 
access points across our footprint. 
In addition, Liberty Global owns 50% of 
VodafoneZiggo, a joint venture in the 
Netherlands with 4 million customers 
subscribing to 10 million fixed-line and 5 
million mobile services, as well as significant 
investments in ITV, All3Media, ITI Neovision, 
LionsGate, the Formula E racing series and 
several regional sports networks. 