ETSI Contribution to the consultation on the 
draft AI Regulation 
Preamble 
ETSI welcomes the draft Regulation on AI presented by the European Commission (EC) at https://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206. The draft Regulation builds on the 
processes of the New Legislative Framework (NLF) putting harmonised European Standards into the 
focus of demonstrating compliance with the regulatory requirements. This is in line with the view of 
ETSI that "The NLF should be used for technical regulation in new areas including AI and data." 
ETSI has analysed the draft AI Regulation in an activity involving the ETSI Board as well as ETSI's expert 
group on AI, set up across all technical committees and groups working on AI, the OCG-AI group. ETSI 
has many activities in the area of AI, focusing on applications in or using ICT. A concise overview from 
our working groups is available on the OCG-AI's web site at https://portal.etsi.org//TBSiteMap/OCG/OCG-AI-Co-ordination. 
With this document ETSI provides feedback on the draft Regulation based on the broad spectrum of 
expert knowledge available in ETSI. This includes in depth knowledge of AI technologies and systems 
as well as expertise present in ETSI on European standardisation, e.g. from the work on harmonised 
standards in support of other technical regulation and on the basis of ETSI's ENAP process for the 
development and adoption of harmonised standards. 
ETSI also thanks the EC for the established close dialogue and exchange on the draft AI Regulation. 
This dialogue is very helpful for ETSI in its role as a European Standardisation Organisation to 
prepare for the upcoming tasks of developing harmonised European standards on AI. 
1. On the technical aspects of the draft Regulation on AI 
Overall, with the Regulation of AI, in a style similar to the NLF, Europe enters a new area in technical 
regulation by applying the NLF model to software. While there are some examples that this works 
well and that also the life-cycle of a product can be addressed well in that way, it is still a new area 
which also means that all parties will be on a learning curve. 
ETSI has expertise - in particular with the EMCD, RED and Accessibility and their respective 
harmonised standards - ETSI is ready to leverage this expertise to achieve successful development 
of harmonised European standards in support of the future Regulation on AI. 
Definition of AI  
It has been noted that the current definition of AI as proposed by the EC in TITLE 1 Article 3(1) and in 
Annex I may be misinterpreted insofar as even the use of a spreadsheet for calculating some statistics 
may fall under the ANNEX 1 list of techniques at point (c) 
We welcome the clarification made verbally by the EC that this is not what is intended and appreciate 
the readiness of the EC to provide written clarification of their definition of AI for the purposes of 

standardisation. ETSI understands that the first step in application of conformance rules is to check 
if a software (AI) solution falls into the category of High-Risk, and only afterwards to check whether 
the technology is one that is described in the broad types listed in Annex 1. Therefore the clarity of 
classification of "high-risk AI systems" (Annex III) is very important. 
ETSI invites the EC to engage in further discussions related to the definitions of AI and AI systems in 
order to clearly differentiate i) those AI functions and systems that are considered high-risk and fall 
under this regulation; ii) those AI functions and systems requiring recommendations to the industry 
to be applied; and iii) those AI functions and systems requiring no regulation. 
Regulation of High-Risk Systems 
The allocation of any particular AI application to a risk level (fitting the risk model of the Commission) 
is a first approximation, and it may need reviewing on a case by case basis as experience with 
deployed AI solutions shows that the AI solution use case is higher or lower risk than expected with 
regard to human values/lives. Such reviews must be performed transparently and with some 
transition period for changes. It would greatly aid efficient development of standards and detection 
of "standardisation gaps" if the EC would establish a collaborative effort to create examples of use 
cases that are definitively "high-risk". 
No ex-ante Conformance requirements on "early adopter" AI Solutions 
ETSI welcomes the assurance of the Commission that solutions entering the market prior to the AI 
Regulation coming into force will not be subject to ex-ante regulation and conformance testing. At 
the same time, it is understood that when substantial updates of such solutions are made, in the 
normal business of adaptive solutions, then the updated solution must be assessed to see whether 
it is subject to constraints under the AI Regulation. In such case, the standards and testing and 
conformance rules will apply that have in the meantime been established. With its role as an ESO 
and its open and inclusive standardisation processes ETSI will have a key role in assisting market 
participants as well as regulators here by providing all information about standards under 
development in the usual highly transparent manner so that all stakeholders can follow and 
participate in the development processes and prepare for adoption of the respective standards. 
Monitoring of some AI Solutions in the market 
Article 64 "Access to data and documentation" specifies that the market surveillance authorities shall 
be granted full access to the training, validation and testing datasets used by the provider, including 
through application programming interfaces (‘API’). It is understood by ETSI from remarks made by 
the EC that this is not intended as a routine event, but for exceptional cases, and that the "API" need 
be openly defined but not the same in all cases, i.e. the API does not need to be a single interface for 
all the various AI solution on the market. 
ETSI also recommends that documenting the processes utilized to ensure training data quality could 
be used by market surveillance authorities instead of accessing training data which would then need 
to be stored for an indefinite period of time. For example, collaborative federated solutions for 
obtaining and integrating training data across a number of distinct data holders demand a more 
flexible approach for quality assurance than accessing the training data itself. 

In a similar approach, the documented process for obtaining datasets for validation (testing for types 
of bias, etc) is a more generally valid and efficient market surveillance exercise than is examination 
of the datasets themselves. The validation datasets are also different in nature to the Training 
datasets and need to be considered differently. ETSI would welcome a dialogue and possibly jointly 
agreed standards/guidelines on appropriate validation methodologies. 
Mutual International Recognition of Solutions 
ETSI is made up of members from all over the planet so we strongly appreciate efforts to create 
synergies of regulation concepts globally, to avoid barriers to trade. In the long term, after a period 
of testing in the market place, a number of bilateral Mutual Recognition Agreements with major 
trading partners would be to the benefit of EU citizens (who might use best-of-breed solutions 
including from international sources) and for EU businesses (which might market their solutions 
internationally without needing major re-fitting of software). 
2. On the close collaboration between the European 
Commission and the ESOs 
ETSI appreciates the regular exchange established with the three ESOs. Close collaboration is very 
important to ensure effective work in the ESOs and thus effective support for the implementation of 
the Regulation. 
3. The European Artificial Intelligence Board (EAIB) 
ETSI stands ready to contribute expertise towards tasks of the European Artificial Intelligence 
Board (see Article 58). ETSI proposes that the European Standardisation Organisations be allocated 
a Membership / Observer status to this Board so as to closely assist the work including minimising 
delays. 
4. On the development of harmonised European Standards 
It is important to have Standardisation Requests early in order to start working on mutual 
understanding of what is needed for the harmonised standards and to speed up their production. 
ETSI welcomes the confirmation from the EC that : 
(i) it is intended to issue standardisation requests before the adoption of the Regulation, 
probably by the end of 2021 or early 2022 ; and 
(ii) the European Commission will actively participate in the standards development 
committees and be part of the development process from beginning to end. 
These factors will help to ensure that the EC's requirements are met in a timely way and to support 
the respective technical committee(s) for meeting the detailed requirements of the respective 
standardisation requests. Finally, it will ensure that the final standards will be ready to be cited in the 
OJEU. 

Such involvement of the EC will also address reservations against the provision in Article 41 which 
states that if harmonised standards "do not exist or where the Commission considers that the 
relevant harmonised standards are insufficient or that there is a need to address specific safety or 
fundamental right concerns" then the Commission may adopt other specifications. With the EC being 
an active participant and constantly monitoring the progress of the development of the harmonised 
standards, such a possible situation will be avoided. The NLF has proved to be highly effective and 
successful regarding the provision of safe and trusted products and technologies for the single 
European market. 
ETSI will support involvement and interaction and close exchange with other organisations 
throughout the standards development process. ETSI's processes fully support this way of working. 
ETSI Staff support will further help ensure successful and results oriented standards development. 
The integration of European work with international standardisation work is welcomed, provided 
that it happens in a transparent way that involves all stakeholders. Moreover, ETSI has multiple 
cooperation and liaisons in place with other standards bodies worldwide and processes in place for 
adopting technical specifications from other sources. 
ETSI recognizes that some fundamental aspects of AI solutions, and also the means to test and 
monitor them as required by the AI Regulation, may still require additional research and 
development. Some of the monitoring requirements of the AI Regulation may not be resolved for all 
important use cases and may require additional research. ETSI wishes to accelerate the development 
of appropriate standards through tighter integration with the EU research and development 
community and with various Horizon Europe programmes, and through cooperation with 
international standards setting organizations on development of AI standards. ETSI is already 
adapting processes and increasing its outreach to EC-funded R&D. 
Conclusion 
ETSI welcomes the AI Regulation in the current draft, as an important step forward for Europe and 
the world in the process of creating human-centric AI solutions. ETSI sees a need for (a) timely 
clarifications of the definitions of AI and “high risk” AI systems, respectively, in the Regulation; (b) 
promotion of some fundamental research/development topics needed for conformance checking; 
and (c) a focus on those use cases ("high risk") requiring very careful performance checking and 
results/bias checking to avoid risks of harm; (d) early start and close collaboration of the EC and the 
ESOs on defining Standardisation Requests; (e) timely agreement and progress on the SRs. 