1(3) 
2021-08-04 
To: European Commission 
BIL Sweden’s response to EUCOM’s public consultation on 
”Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council laying down harmonised rules on artificial 
intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and amending certain 
union legislative acts”, 2021/0106 (COD) 
BIL Sweden is thankful for the opportunity by the Commission to submit comments on the 
proposed AI Act. 
BIL Sweden’s views 
BIL Sweden choose to limit our comments to those proposals that we predominately perceive 
concern vehicles. Here, by "vehicles" is meant those vehicles that our members manufacture, i.e. 
passenger cars, buses, trucks and certain types of work machines. 
BIL Sweden’s members have also contributed to and support ACEA’s response to EUCOM’s public 
consultation on AI Act. 
Sectorial approach 
BIL Sweden welcomes the EU Commission's sectoral approach where the technical requirements for 
automotive products are integrated within existing frameworks for type approval of vehicles, EU 
regulations 2018/858 and 2019/2144, thereby avoiding duplication of governance mechanisms. 
However, the European Commission has taken the liberty of allowing itself to make changes through 
delegated acts, continuously. This approach makes it very difficult for the automotive industry to 
provide our views and comments. 
Long lead times 
Vehicles probably have a significantly longer development cycle than many other products that 
contain AI. When EU Regulation 2018/858 will be amended, when a future delegated act that 
includes AI will be adopted, an appropriate time frame / lead time for a phased implementation is 
needed for both new vehicle types and all vehicle types to meet the new requirements. 
Technology neutrality 
The technology development is very rapid, and the AI Act’s ambition is to affect all sectors, thus it 
must be technology neutral. 

2(3) 
Harmonisation with UNECE 
The automotive industry is global. The Swedish vehicle manufacturers, as well as the European 
vehicle manufacturers, export their vehicles both to EU countries and to countries outside the EU. 
It is important that the AI Act does not create trade restrictions and/or reduce the competitiveness of 
European companies. 
BIL Sweden advocates that it’s important that the AI Act is harmonized with the work carried out at 
UNECE level for vehicle regulation, for example with the working groups FRAV (Functional 
Requirements for Automated and Autonomous Vehicles) and VMAD (Validation Method for 
Automated Driving) with regard to automated vehicles. 
The AI Act in relation to existing regulations concerning AI 
Before new EU-regulations are drawn up, existing regulations concerning the area of AI should be 
reviewed, to identify where there is overlap and what is not already covered, the "white spots". Often, 
it’s easier and faster to propose additions/adjustments to existing regulations than to create a 
completely new one. 
There may also be sectors that have already regulated an aspect that concerns AI, where experience 
could be used by other sectors. Within the automotive industry, for example, there is a new legislation 
that regulates the right to introduce software updates, UNECE-R156 "Software update and software 
update management system", which may interest other sectors using software updates. 
The AI Act in relation to the GDPR (and the forthcoming regulation on ePrivacy) etc. 
Vehicle manufacturers also see a significant risk that the extensive and highly set requirements set out 
in the proposal, in combination with other existing legislation such as the GDPR (and also 
forthcoming regulation on ePrivacy), could lead to companies in some cases refraining from deploy 
AI and thus loses the positive effects, both for the users and the people "exposed" to AI. 
BIL Sweden's view is that this may affect the competitiveness and attractiveness of the EU vehicle 
manufacturers, its suppliers and society as a whole. 
It also appears that the AI Act, at least in part, overlaps with the framework for data protection, 
product safety, discrimination and liability. In this consultation response, we have not immersed into 
this, but it needs to be reviewed to avoid double regulation and ambiguities. 
The definition of AI 
The AI Act introduces a very broad definition of AI. It would be gained by even greater clarity, 
primarily with regard to the definition of high-risk AI systems and the demarcation for which AI 
systems that are considered to entail high risk. 
Risk-based approach 
BIL Sweden support the logic behind the risk-based approach set out in the proposal, this should 
ensure that the requirements in the AI Act are in proportion to the level of risk for AI applications 
and that they are not so burdensome for companies throughout Europe. However, it is important 
that high-risk is well defined. 
Article 9 on Risk Management Systems contain some vague wordings, which may cause legal 
uncertainties, and should therefore be clarified and simplified. 

3(3) 
The definition of high-risk 
The vehicle industry is a part of Annex II through WVTA and GSR and has, thus by definition, been 
classified as high-risk. 
BIL Sweden advocates that clarification is needed, regarding whether it’s all systems falling under EU 
Regulation 2018/858 Type Approval and GSR that are by definition classified as high risk. 
The vehicle manufacturers see a significant risk, if so, that AI will not be used in vehicles. In that case, 
it would result in the automotive industry not being allowed to contribute as much to increased road 
safety as they could have done. 
BIL Sweden also advocates that clarification is needed regarding the definition in Article 3 (14) of 
"safety component in a product or system". 
Data and data governance 
Article 10, §3, states that ”Training, validation and testing data sets shall be relevant, representative, free 
of errors and complete. They shall have the appropriate statistical properties, including, where applicable, 
as regards the persons or groups of persons on which the high-risk AI system is intended to be used.”. 
BIL Sweden believes that data, usually and in practice, can never be guaranteed to be completely "free 
from errors" and "complete", validation of such is not practically possible. It is also not possible to 
fully ensure that all data has "the appropriate statistical properties". 
Record-keeping 
Article 12, §2, states that ”The logging capabilities shall ensure a level of traceability of the AI system’s 
functioning throughout its lifecycle that is appropriate to the intended purpose of the system.”. 
BIL Sweden advocates that a clarification is needed as to what is meant by "lifecycle", if it means that 
events (logs) must be stored for the entire life of a product. 
It’s important to keep in mind that storing logs for a longer period of time requires large storage 
capacity, which can lead to large consequences in terms of increased costs for data storage, increased 
energy consumption and maintenance. Overall, this would be inconsistent in view of the goals of 
climate neutrality set out in the European Green Deal but also in view of the goals of strengthening 
European competitiveness. 
Innovation and AI regulatory sandboxes 
BIL Sweden welcomes the opportunity for AI regulatory sandboxes but advocates that much sharper 
proposals are needed for experimental opportunities that benefit technology development and 
innovation. In regulated sandboxes, companies should be able to test ideas under limited 
responsibility and without being affected by the burdensome market access system that assessments 
of conformity constitute. The innovation capacity is central to competitiveness and should therefore 
enable in a clearer and simpler way. The right to experiment under certain conditions should be 
included directly in the proposal and not handed over to the respective member state since it could 
lead to different interpretations and thus conditions within the internal market. When it comes to 
experiments for new AI solutions, there are today many limitations, for example due to the GDPR's 
rules. 
BIL Sweden is pleased to be available for further discussions or any clarifications. 
Maria Backlund 
Technical Coordinator: Vehicle regulations and Research 
BIL Sweden 