AI Austria commends the European Commission for the extensive consultative process that led to the 
publication of the globally first attempt to lay down a comprehensive legislative framework for the 
development and use of artificial intelligence systems (Artificial Intelligence Act). We support the 
European Commission’s stated objectives of creating an ecosystem of trust and excellence to promote 
the European Union's research, development and initiatives of trustworthy AI. We highly appreciate 
having the opportunity to provide our perspective on this important legislation and would like to share 
and address the following observations. 
SAME EFFECT SAME REGULATION TO PREVENT CIRCUMVENTION. 
The Artificial Intelligence Act relies on a technology-based 
definition of artificial intelligence (AI), which is determined by the 
use of certain techniques (Annex I). Systems applying these 
techniques are "AI Systems" and subject to the Artificial 
Intelligence Act as well as the prohibitions and requirements of 
the respective risk categories. We believe that the prohibitions and obligations of 
the Artificial Intelligence Act should not only be triggered by any specific type of 
technology defined as AI, but also consider measures having equivalent effect. 
Currently, use cases identified as prohibited or high risk may be realized without 
applying the technologies specifically defined as AI, allowing circumvention of the 
framework of trust to be created by the Artificial Intelligence Act. 
FIRM PROHIBITION OF BIOMETRIC MASS SURVEILLANCE. 
The Artificial Intelligence Act prohibits "real time" remote 
biometric identification systems in public spaces for law 
enforcement purposes (Article 5) with several worrisome 
exceptions. We believe the scope of the current provision does 
not sufficiently prevent the risk of indiscriminate mass 
surveillance and the full threat such use case poses to fundamental principles of 
democratic societies. In our view, the prohibition should extend to (i) systems 
having equivalent effect, irrespective of the technology, (i) public authorities and 
private actors acting on their behalf, (ii) 'post' biometric identification systems 
subsequently applied and not provide for any exemptions based on the criminal 
offence. 
CREATING EFFECTIVE SANDBOX SUPPORT TO FOSTER INNOVATION. 
The Artificial Intelligence Act provides for the establishment of 
AI Sandboxes, where small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and 
startups shall have preferential admission. However, further 
specifications of AI sandboxes are still open and yet to be 
determined. We believe that from a technology point of view, developing modern 
AI techniques require the following three pillars: (i) data access, (ii) heuristic 
knowledge and (iii) computing power. Therefore, the framework for the creation 
of AI sandboxes should provide active support in these three vital areas to foster 
the development of trustworthy European AI and excellence center. 

USING DATA SOURCES ALREADY AVAILABLE EFFECTIVELY AND SECURELY. 
The Artificial Intelligence Act contains regulations on data and its 
governance for high risk AI systems (Article 10). Data sets shall in 
particular be relevant, representative, free of errors and complete. 
Even tough huge amounts of data are created and collected daily, 
such data and its potential remains untapped in data silos and the 
Artificial Intelligence Act does not create a basis for data sharing (of 
course subject to appropriate safeguards). Acknowledging the fundamental 
importance of data privacy and individuals' rights to data, we believe that data 
available and gathered already (e.g. by institutions, authorities, etc) should be 
made available subject to safeguards imposed for the rights of individuals under 
the GDPR and privacy acts. 
PROVIDING GUIDANCE AND ENSURING EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT. 
We support the European Commission for recognizing the 
instrumental value of transparency and creating an 
incentive of compliance-by-design by including obligations 
for providers, operators and importers of AI systems in 
terms of transparency and risk assessment. In most cases providers will be 
conducting the assessment to determine if their AI system is in line with the 
Artificial Intelligence Act on their own. In order to do so correctly, we believe 
compliance standards on a more granular level should be provided to ensure 
clarity of the obligations and requirements. Simultaneously, the Artificial 
Intelligence Act contains a wide array of involved authorities and bodies. In this 
regard, we advocate that the roles of the entities involved should be clarified and 
such entities shall be sufficiently and adequately equipped with the relevant 
resources and expertise for effective oversight. 