Moje Państwo Foundation
25/31 Nowogrodzka Street
00-511 Warsaw, Poland
Transparency Register no.: 020222326905-75
Remarks of Moje Państwo Foundation
on the European Commission’s Proposal for a Regulation Laying
Down Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence
(Artificial Intelligence Act) 2021/0106(COD)
Warsaw, 6th August, 2021

I. Introduction
Moje
Państwo
Foundation
(“Foundation”)
is
an
organization
working
for
the
development of democracy, open and transparent public authority and civic engagement.
By exercising the right of access to public information and the right to re-use public
sector information, the Foundation collects publicly available data sets and makes them
available to citizens through the Foundation's services.
Due to the fact that the context of the consultations run by the European Commission
from 26th April to 6th August 2021 are related to many relevant aspects for the
Foundation’s activity, we present our position in regards to the Proposal for a Regulation
Laying Down Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) (“the
AI Act” or “the European Commission’s Proposal”) below – with particular emphasis
on the use of artificial intelligence systems (“AI systems”) by public institutions.
II. General remarks
We appreciate the work of the European Commission undertaken to create a regulation
aims
ensure that artificial intelligence is safe, lawful and in line with EU
fundamental
rights.
The
European
Commission’s
Proposal
contains
many
valuable
solutions creating a legal framework for artificial intelligence.
From the perspective of our Foundation, the AI Act should – to a greater extent
– ensure transparency of the public sector in relation to the use of artificial
intelligence systems.
AI systems can be used by public institutions in many key areas, such as, for example,
health protection, education, social services, the judiciary and the economy. As a
consequence, these systems can have a very broad and varied impact and can affect
many different social groups, including those particularly vulnerable to discrimination.
The use of AI systems by the state in many situations may lead to shaping the scope of
rights and obligations of citizens by these systems.
The European Commission’s Proposal presupposes measures to regulate the use of AI
systems in relation to public authorities - for example, the proposal prohibits AI-based
social scoring for general purposes done by public authorities; the use of ‘real time’
remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of
law enforcement is also prohibited unless certain limited exceptions apply; Annex III

High-Risk AI Systems referred to in article 6(2) points out that many high-risk artificial
intelligence systems which are listed in specific areas, are listed in areas of state
operation.
The preamble to the European Commission’s Proposal (point 40) states that: “Certain AI
systems intended for the administration of justice and democratic processes should be
classified as high-risk, considering their potentially significant impact on democracy, rule
of law, individual freedoms as well as the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial.
In particular, to address the risks of potential biases, errors and opacity, it is appropriate
to qualify as high-risk AI systems intended to assist judicial authorities in researching
and interpreting facts and the law and in applying the law to a concrete set of facts.
Such
qualification should not extend, however, to AI systems intended for purely
ancillary administrative activities that do not affect the actual administration of justice in
individual cases, such as pseudonymisation of judicial decisions, documents or data,
communication between anonymisation or personnel, administrative tasks or allocation
of resources.”
The Foundation points out that there may be a situation where the AI system –
seemingly intended for ancillary administrative activities – will actually have an impact
on the exercise of public authority (e.g. in the administration of justice), including the
direct situation of citizens. A misinterpretation in determining whether a given AI system
is a high-risk system or not, in particular when this system is used by public authorities,
may have a wide range of negative consequences for citizens, due to the lower degree of
transparency in the operation of such a system. Due to the fact that most of the AI
systems used by public institutions will have a potentially significant impact on shaping
the rights or obligations of citizens, we postulate that in the European Commission's
Proposal the measures controlling the use and implementation of artificial intelligence by
public authorities should be strengthened.
We
propose
all
systems
based
on
artificial
intelligence,
which
are
implemented in public institutions, should be properly subject to the obligations
provided for in the European Commission's Proposal for high risk AI systems.
We believe that all AI-based systems that are implemented in public institutions can
potentially affect the rights and obligations of citizens. Not all of these AI systems will
appear to be high-risk, but most of them will have the potential to have a broad and
deep impact on society, including possible undesirable effects.

We enthusiastically embrace the concept of establishing an EU database for stand-alone
high-risk AI systems (“EU Database”) (art. 60). We have been supporting this idea
since it appeared in WHITE PAPER On Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to
excellence and trust, which was subject to public consultation. We recommended this
solution in 2019 in the Foundation’s report: “alGOVrithm. The State of Play” on the use
of algorithms and systems based on Automatic Decision Making in state-citizen relations.
The Foundation proposed then the creation of an appropriate governmental body or
equipping the existing one with additional competences in the area of supervision of the
development, implementation and use of automatic decision-making.
Pursuant to art. 60 of the European Commission's Proposal: “The Commission shall, in
collaboration with the Member States, set up and maintain a EU database containing
information referred to in paragraph 2 concerning high-risk AI systems referred to in
Article 6(2) which are registered in accordance with Article 51.”
The EU Database is to include only those AI systems that qualify as high-risk AI systems,
which means that some of the systems will operate outside the EU Database. We
appreciate that Annex III listing high-risk AI systems is quite broad in scope, but does
not cover all systems that may be used by the public sector and that may have a
negative impact on fundamental rights. This applies, for example, to systems that
allocate judges or officials to specific court cases.
We
would
also
like
point
out
the
EU
Database
will
be
established
and
administered by the European Commission, while information about the systems will be
posted there by their suppliers, not by competent officials. The Foundation sees the risk
in the mechanism that allows suppliers to self-assess, especially in high-risk systems. At
the same time, we strongly support the idea that the information contained in the EU
Database is publicly available.
In 2019, we recommended creating a publicly available database (at the
national level) containing all AI-based systems used by state institutions. We
are reiterating this recommendation because we believe that any use of the AI
system in the public sector may have an impact on the situation of citizens and
as such may generate a high risk for their rights and obligations. A database
should contain at least: basic information about the AI system along with an indication of
the public sector entity using the system and the contact information of this entity. Such
a database would allow interested citizens to obtain information that a given public
institution uses AI-based solutions in the performance of its tasks, and in the next stage

verify
whether the AI systems comply with the requirements contained in the
European Commission’s Proposal.
III.
The European Commission’s Proposal will have its impact not only on the EU and its
Member States but also on other countries and will shape the rights of citizens in the
context of the use of artificial intelligence for decades. Due to this fact, we consider it
extremely important to ensure proper regulation of issues related to AI systems used in
any way by public institutions.