AI EU ACT: Main issues identified by Intel and recommended corrections 
Intel appreciates that the proposed Regulation takes a risk-based approach to Artificial Intelligence 
(AI). However, the complexity of the AI value chain and the fact that some key definitions leave 
room for interpretation may result in uncertainty in determining which entities are considered 
providers of AI systems and which AI systems are high risk. To address these concerns, we offer the 
following comments to clarify which entities and products are in scope of the draft Regulation. 
AI system –We recognize the difficulty of unambiguously defining AI and understand that the 
proposed definition of an AI System in the draft Regulation is drawn from the OECD. As this 
definition is overly broad, we support the approach to further qualify it by specifying the techniques 
used to develop AI systems. However, while the techniques listed in Annex I (a) “machine learning” 
and (b) “knowledge based” are intrinsically identified with AI, the ones listed in (c) “statistical 
approaches, Bayesian estimation, search and optimization methods” are techniques that are either 
not unequivocally related to AI or just support other AI techniques. The designation “statistical 
approaches” lacks precision, “Bayesian estimation” is frequently used outside machine learning, and 
“search and optimization methods” have been used for decades to perform various types of search, 
training, and optimization (e.g. statistical estimation was used in 2G cellular systems). Not every 
search algorithm, optimization problem, or statistical calculation is an AI problem. For this reason, 
we recommend removing point (c) of Annex I, thereby focusing only on AI approaches and 
techniques listed in points (a) and (b) of Annex I. 
AI value chain – Recital 60 recognises the complexity of the AI value chain, made of “relevant third 
parties, notably the ones involved in the sale and the supply of software, software tools and 
components, pre-trained models and data, or providers of network services”. The broad definition of 
“AI system” described above and subsequently of a “provider” poses serious challenges in 
determining which AI systems and “providers” are in scope of the proposed Regulation. Therefore, 
we suggest clarifying the proposed Regulation to differentiate roles in the AI value chain, such that 
entities developing toolkits, software libraries, etc. are not considered “providers” by stating that 
“these relevant third parties, inter alia, providers of general purpose AI systems intended to be 
incorporated or refined into a final product, are not considered providers of AI systems in the 
proposed Regulation”. 
Safety component – the draft Regulation utilises the concept of “safety component” in the 
determination of the level of risk of an AI system. The proposed definition of what constitutes a 
“safety component” is open to interpretation and remains a source of uncertainty for the 
qualification of high-risk AI systems. To reduce this ambiguity, we believe it is important that 
references to “safety component” leverage EU harmonised legislation to align with any relevant 
essential requirements. In other words, when assessing an AI system for the purposes of paragraph 
1 of Article 6, a safety component is assessed based on the relevant EU harmonisation legislation 
listed in Annex II. 
Management and operation of critical infrastructure – the draft Regulation states that AI systems 
intended to be used as safety components in the management and operation of road traffic and the 

supply of water, gas, heating and electricity are high-risk. This causes uncertainty in determining a 
safety component (e.g. what exactly constitutes road traffic management and operation?). Annex III 
would gain clarity by amending it to limit its scope to AI systems which are developed with a clearly 
safety-related intended use. Further, only those AI systems developed with a safety-related intended 
use to operate road infrastructure components should be in scope, therefore excluding those which 
are integrated in vehicles; otherwise these would conflict with Regulation (EU) 2018/858 and Article 
2.2. 