REQUEST FOR COMMENT RESPONSE
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council: Laying Down
Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence and Amending Certain Union Legislative
Acts
August 6 2021
I.
INTRODUCTION
In response to the European Commission’s request for public consultation on Artificial
Intelligence, CrowdStrike offers the following views.
We
approach
these
questions
from
the
standpoint
of
a
leading
international,
US-headquartered cloud-native cybersecurity provider that defends globally distributed
enterprises from globally distributed threats. CrowdStrike offers insights informed by
multiple practice areas: cyber threat intelligence; proactive, incident response and
managed
security
services;
and
an AI-powered software-as-a-service cybersecurity
platform and marketplace. Accordingly, this perspective is informed by CrowdStrike’s role
in protecting organizations from data breaches and a variety of other cyber threats.
II.
COMMENTS
A. AI and Machine Learning
The widening adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) periodically
raises fears about automated decision-making, surveillance, algorithmic bias, and other
negative externalities. In specific instances, these concerns may warrant suspicion and
intense scrutiny. However, it is critical for policy makers to understand that AI/ML also
has the opportunity to drive positive social outcomes; is already widely deployed in
important instances driving such outcomes; and creates the opportunity for innovation in a
variety of important spheres, including industries such as medicine and education.
Our comments will focus on the use of AI/ML within cybersecurity solutions. Legacy
cybersecurity solutions used to rely on scanning files against signatures of previously
identified malicious files. This process was onerous, resource-intensive, and could be easily
circumvented through the use of novel or slightly modified approaches. Next-generation
solutions, which leverage AI/ML, can detect previously unknown threats based on their

characteristics or behaviors. This offers much more robust protection against threat
activity.
Leveraging AI/ML can achieve success against unknown unknowns. For example, a
machine learning model, shipped to CrowdStrike’s Falcon Platform customers in September
2019, detected with high confidence the SUNSPOT malware, which was central to a
sophisticated
campaign
that
targeted
high-value
government
organizations
in
late
2020-early 2021. ​Sven Krasser, “Stellar Performances: How CrowdStrike Machine Learning Handles the SUNSPOT Malware,”
CrowdStrike Blog (Jan. 21, 2021)
https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/stellar-performances-how-crowdstrike-machine-learning-handles-the-s
unspot-malware/.​  This is one of many instances of AI/ML typifying the best ways to defeat
threat actors using new or tailored tools, tactics, techniques, or procedures.
B. AI and Cybersecurity
In cybersecurity, AI is an advantage, especially when added to enterprise security
solutions. ​Michael Sentonas, How Artificial Intelligence is Becoming a Key Weapon in the Cybersecurity War, CrowdStrike
Blog, Oct. 24, 2017,
https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/how-artificial-intelligence-is-becoming-a-key-weapon-in-the-cybersecu
rity-war/.​  Cybersecurity threats are exceptionally broad, and for too long industry players
have focused on narrow solutions. No box on a network or a single-purpose software agent
will address the full scope of the problem. Security teams demand contextual awareness
and visibility from across their entire environments, including within cloud and ephemeral
environments. Indeed, with the help of AI, CrowdStrike can stop an attack in its tracks
because such technology works faster than conventional signature-based or indicator of
compromise (IOC)-based prevention.
As such, CrowdStrike recommends that the EC consider exemptions to any future
regulations concerning AI. Like in other realms of European Union regulation​EU regulations regularly acknowledge the unique importance of cybersecurity innovation. The proposed
ePrivacy Regulation includes a cybersecurity exemption. Similarly, the General Data Protection Regulation’s
Recital 49 specifically identifies cybersecurity as a legitimate interest for the processing of personal data.​ , due to the
advantages AI brings to cybersecurity, we encourage the EC to consider a cybersecurity
exemption.
Ultimately, CrowdStrike understands that a concern with AI is the possible harm to
individuals, but for AI, like for any other technology, the context in which it is used, rather
than the mere fact that it is incorporated, is material. Regulating AI for the sake of the
technology rather than its application is not the best approach to foster-innovative
solutions to difficult problems. Conversely, we recommend embracing common EU

approaches to protecting the fundamental rights of individuals in a technology-neutral
manner. When creating regulations on the safe use of AI, the EC should consider adopting
language similar to the General Data Protection Regulation’s (“GDPR”) requirement that
organizations
implement
safeguards
“appropriate”
to
the
risk
to
protect
personal
information. This approach incentivizes organizations to take into account modern,
rapidly-evolving data breach risks posed by cybersecurity threats from e-crime, ‘hacktivist’,
and nation state actors using tactics such as ransomware, supply chain attacks, or
malware-less intrusions.
III.
CONCLUSION
The EC’s proposed regulation provides a thoughtful analysis of a complex legal and policy
area. As the EC updates its regulations, we recommend continued engagement with
international stakeholders. Adversaries innovate at a record-pace, and it’s important to
empower defenders to leverage global data flows, big data analytics, and machine learning
to protect against ever-evolving threats. Finally, because the underlying technologies
evolve faster than law and policy, we recommend and emphasize that any proposed
legislative updates focus on principles rather than prescriptive requirements and include a
mechanism for periodic revisions.
IV.
ABOUT CROWDSTRIKE
CrowdStrike® Inc. (Nasdaq: CRWD), a global cybersecurity leader, is redefining security for
the cloud era with an endpoint protection platform built from the ground up to stop
breaches. The CrowdStrike Falcon® platform’s single lightweight-agent architecture
leverages cloud-scale AI and offers real-time protection and visibility across the enterprise,
preventing attacks on endpoints on or off the network. Powered by the proprietary
CrowdStrike Threat Graph®, CrowdStrike Falcon correlates over 3 trillion endpoint-related
events per week in real time from across the globe, fueling one of the world’s most
advanced data platforms for security.
With CrowdStrike, customers benefit from better protection, better performance and
immediate time-to-value delivered by the cloud-native Falcon platform.
There’s only one thing to remember about CrowdStrike: We stop breaches. Learn more:
https://www.crowdstrike.com/.
V.
CONTACT

We would welcome the opportunity to discuss these matters in more detail. Public policy
inquiries should be made to:
Drew Bagley CIPP/E
Dr. Christoph Bausewein CIPP/E
VP & Counsel, Privacy and Cyber Policy Director & Counsel, Data Protection & Policy
Email: policy@crowdstrike.com
©2021 CrowdStrike, Inc. All rights reserved. CrowdStrike, the falcon logo, CrowdStrike
Falcon and CrowdStrike Threat Graph are trademarks owned by CrowdStrike, Inc. and
registered with the United States Patent and Trademark Office, and in other countries.
CrowdStrike owns other trademarks and service marks, and may use the brands of third
parties to identify their products and services.