Feedback on proposal to regulate artificial intelligence 
By Norwegian labor union Negotia 
Negotia is a labor union for private sector employees. We organize members from business 
areas such as service, sale, marketing, IT, administration, organization, laboratories, 
logistics, accounting and finance. Negotia is a politically independent organization and 
affiliated with the umbrella organization Norwegian Confederation of Vocational Unions 
(YS). Approximately 21 500 workers employed in the private sector are organized in Negotia. 
Negotia would like to commend the European Commission for proposing legislation that 
represents an important step towards protecting fundamental rights when it comes to the 
rapidly evolving technology of artificial intelligence. 
It is our belief that new technology creates jobs and increased value for companies. As a trade 
union, we are nevertheless concerned that the proposed legislation does not provide 
employees with sufficient protection against the negative consequences of using artificial 
intelligence in the workplace. 
We fully support categorizing the use of artificial intelligence in the workplace as high-risk, 
based on the possible threat to workers' fundamental rights. The European Commission's 
proposal mentions, in particular, the use of artificial intelligence in recruitment processes, in 
decisions regarding promotions or termination of employment, in the distribution of work 
tasks or the monitoring and evaluation of employees. Negotia agrees that all of these areas 
have a major impact on the career opportunities and lives of individual workers. The use of 
artificial intelligence in these areas can easily be perceived as intrusive. Flaws in the 
technology used can, in worst case scenarios, lead to systematic discrimination. The 
introduction of artificial intelligence in these areas must therefore be treated with great 
caution. 
Any introduction of artificial intelligence into an organization will affect the employees. It is 
our belief that the Commission's proposed legislation on the use of artificial intelligence in the 
workplace, does not provide adequate protection in the face of these risks. Negotia therefore 
believes that all artificial intelligence used in the workplace should be defined as high-risk. 
Furthermore, the proposed regulation does not take into consideration the unique power 
dynamics in the workplace. The proposed system suggests that the users of artificial 
intelligence systems are mostly consumers. In the workplace, however, adopting new 
technology is a leadership decision. Even though it is the employees who risk the greatest 
negative consequences when introducing such systems, they may not be involved in the 
decision-making at all. If a new system is adopted, it is unlikely that any employee can choose 
to opt-out. Negotia believes this should be clearly reflected in the regulation of artificial 
intelligence in the workplace. 
The proposed regulation also does not directly address the ethical implications of using 
artificial intelligence in the workplace. For instance: If the employer's purpose in using 
artificial intelligence is to monitor the employees, this may have a negative effect on them, 
even if the technological solution performs as intended. The undesirable effects of this kind of 
intrusive technology must be taken into account in the final regulation. 

The proposed regulation does not address the role of shop stewards in ensuring that worker's 
rights are safeguarded when artificial intelligence is introduced in the workplace. The best 
solutions are found through local dialogue between management and worker's representatives. 
To ensure co-determination from employees, Negotia believes that the social dialogue should 
have a clearly defined role in the regulation of artificial intelligence in the workplace. We also 
believe that the conformity assessment of artificial intelligence solutions that are intended to 
be used in the workplace should be performed by an independent third party. 
In conclusion, Negotia believes the European Commission's proposal to regulate artificial 
intelligence, is a great step in the right direction, but that it has clear weaknesses when it 
comes to regulating technology in the workplace. Further measures should be put in place to 
ensure workers' rights, in the face of technological developments. 
We are grateful for the opportunity to provide feedback on the proposal,and look forward to 
following the legislative process going forward. 
Monica A. Paulsen 
President of Negotia 